# History

## In the Beginning...

In the beginning there was the High plane of Unix created by the first maker, Sym. Out of the high plane, the great ring Goliaths (among them Grep, Maya, Tun, Git, and Vi) the first children of Sym, came and constructed Obtala, and with it, two forces: Quode and Sul. There were many rainbow Goliaths, some who never contributed to Obtala and deigned to watch. Two in particular were Nil and Enubys, (sometimes called the Ungods) who strove to drain Obtala of all its time and organization.

The lower dimension, Obtala, has many worlds and the world in which the council began is known as Ur (more recently, the Archelux). To the council were appointed twelve scientists of the  first children of Ur. There was Set, Vivian, Evo, Nan, Kiokesuimas, Hor’off, Tallqvis, Erra, Remory, Fuuriff, Nunin, and KlckClck. The council was charged with not only looking after their populations, but with maintaining the Quode in Ur, and with maintaining balance in the world. This objective would come to be interpreted in different ways.

Set looked to maintain that balance through efficiency and improving technology, often fueled by quode. He built guardians, two for each council member. They were synthetic creatures, powered by quode. These creatures would be immortal and were charged with looking after the council members. These creatures came to be known as daemons, synthezoids, the Keepers.

Looking out at the world after ten thousand years, Set decided that the world would not be able to handle an ever-growing population. Something must be done. A source of Quode, one that could not expire, had to be found. He began researching, conducting experiments with the nanosphere that would allow him to punch through the dimensional walls all around them, punch through the walls of the Obtala, and create an unlimited resource for the world. 

But after Set’s experiment, it became known simply as the Shattered Land since all energy and organization was being drained through the wormhole at the center of the inverted mountain.
