# Glossary

Archelux, The
: Basically the word for Earth. The Archelux is seen as both the physical world that people stand on, the actual orb of rock in space, but also counts space, the rings, and the moons. The people of the Archelux view their whole world as a system rather than a planet.

Archeluxians
: The people of the Archelux. However, since the Shattering there has been the arrival of the neo-archeluxians; chiefly among them, the Chimexapods and the Myconoids.

Blackrock
: A dirty fuel source.

Cyclopedia, The
: A large device (of unknown type) that can tell you most things about the Archelux. It is essentially considered a user manual for the world.

Electrol
: Nanotechnological primordial goo.

Extravision
: Some beings ability to see into more of the electromagnetic spectrum than normal light, or the ability to see heat, or the ability to see into the Quode dimension.

Idex Automata
: Evo's creation. Unlike Enki's design, the Idex Automata can use energy from the high plane, but it does so by tunneling into the lower plane and adjusting quode at a microscopic level. Able is built around an Idex Automata which gives him the ability to manipulate Obtala in any way he sees fit.

Logicanth
: A manipulation of the nanosphere that results in a change in the world—a non-permanent "script"

Neo-archeluxians
: Those species of beings who have appeared since the Shattering.

Obtala
: The "upper" world or the physical world that works the way we see it work. It doesn't usually involve strange things like entanglement.

Quode
: Basically the quantum level of reality.

Quodecraft
: The art of constructing things out of the nanosphere or even quanta—there's not a lot of distinction on this world.

Macrobots
: Namely, Nip, Po, Ka and Tet’s the Vim.

Nanosphere
: The tiny machines that exist everywhere in the world, in the air that can be used to manipulate the physical nature of the world as well as construct macrobots.

"Remory’s Guide to the Archelux"
: A book by one of the original council members that describes the Western Hemisphere of Ur.

Sul
: A force separate from Quode that generates time and replication with mutation. One could consider Sul similar to entropy in that without it, things would simply repeat forever.

Texo compass
: A device that can hone in on a target from anywhere in the world by firing a laser toward it.

## The Species of the Archelux

### Synthezoids
An ancient race of machine people, synthezoid beings were constructed tens of thousands of years ago. Although they were manufactured and not intended to procreate, they are actually the first children of the Shattered Land. Though synthezoids possess the ability to construct others of their own kind, how synthezoids function is lost to time. In fact, they are daemons of the world, but because the original Quoders of Warnel abandoned it, the daemons had little left to do but maintain the world and when the First Council formed, there was only left for them to obey the council. So they did. And when the council failed, they wandered and most disappeared.

### Nomex
The nomex are the most common sentient creatures in the world. However, they range in color and appearance. The nomex of the Idex Mortez tend to be dark skinned with dark hair, while the nomex of Boisneval, for instance, are tall and very thin and have very light-colored skin, pinkish to blonde to gray hair and bright blue, green or purple eyes.

### Myconoids
Underground dwellers, the Myconoids, without their biome, are very tall (2 meters) and very thin and haveno eyes. They grow lichen and mushrooms on themselves (referred to as their biome) for sustenance and protection.

### Hazarabi
Similar in size and shape to humans, but smaller, the Hazarabi live on and around the Silt Sea, their capital city being Kvet. They are small in stature (~1 meter) and grow their hair in long, thick bushels that collect silt, protecting them both from the sun and wind on the Silt Sea. With expertise, they can even manufacture silt clouds that make them nearly invisible. Their hair is generally brown or black and their eyes usually gold, but they are rarely seen without significant amounts of obscuring clothing such as goggles. They are quiet and fierce.

### Chimexapods
Large mantis-like insect people who live East of the Inverted Mountain. They generally stay in their territory, but in recent times, for some reason, they have been encroaching on other lands.

### The F'myn
_(F'myn is really pronounced like wind in the trees, but not really possible for other species to speak)_ There should be a people like the Fynn, a tree people, but I'm not sure how to get them into the world since there aren't really forests anymore. Maybe they're extinct and the crew only finds out about them through some holodeck-style interaction. Or maybe, they've developed incredibly intricate green houses, much like Ghendra's and water to them is more precious than gold. They have programmers that can make it for them at great cost.

### Aaraamyn
A vulture-like bird people. Their capital city is the floating city of Uchava. Their culture is very Japanese-like with a great appreciation for design and for things to have longevity. They are largely content to live in their floating houses and cities and ignore the lower world. They have maintained lots of greenery and agriculture by being higher in the atmosphere where there is more light and more oxygen.

### Krunmyn
Very large and very slow thick-skinned people; their skin actually resembling rock. 

## Astronomical Elements

The Skybow of the Goliaths
: The Skybow a ring around the (planet) Archelux. It was present prior to the Shattering, but greatly increased in size afterwards.

Zendo
: The larger of two moons in the sky. Zendo is rumored to be where most synthezoids went to live away from organic life, in a "crystal city" called Bin.

Gouth
: The second moon. Further away, but not much smaller than Zendo, Gouth is sometimes described as hell. It is a dark moon and rare to see and often considered a bad omen when present. Indeed, it was coincidentally present when the Shattering occurred.

## Time

Ern - Dustmyn notions for hours.

## The Story Circle

1. A character you can identify with
2. The character has a wish or need that is unfulfilled
3. The need or wish causes them to cross a threshold
4. They go down a road of trials
5. They are searching for something and find it (like it or not)
6. That discovery kicks their ass
7. They come back to the world they started in having gone through trials
8. Having changed


Understanding, or at least manipulating the CODE is the unrealized boon!

## Publishing

Bitly for drafts
https://bit.ly/3oswCW5