# Ideas

+ Why is it easy for us to think of ourselves being in two different moments in time while it is nearly impossible to think of ourselves as in two different places at the same time. Maybe that's something that psychic "locators" for the CIA do. IF there's any truth to those stories, more than one positive result should be impossible.

+ Wacamolo needs to tell a story or give a lesson on the different kinds of infinity—Gef already introduced it.

+ In order for the synthezoids to justify disguising themselves, I need to create one or more real threats to them. Maybe the Fairex want to enslave them!

+ What if Po, Nip and Ka were scientists that agreed to be placed in Idex Automata for Evo in order to "live to fight another day". Grokkon didn't because he knew he would live for a long time. Vivian didn't because she believed, like Tet, that Enkiset's plan could be reversed or fixed. Maybe. Either way, I need to figure out what's been going on with he Council of Scientists and I need to come up with and mention their "scientific" names sooner.

+ There is more than one of Tet—he figured out how to copy himself

+ Cool name: Loathraxx—maybe helpful aaraamyn?

+ Wacamolo tells a story about bees and one bee who thought he had free will.

+ One of the Myconoids melts and a new one grows up in its place. The crew freaks out but it’s normal 

✅ ~~The signal from the Texo Compass is intercepted and pulls the crew to Sulcata Nur Waya. The city has been overtaken by Tet, Gef's "brother" a synthezoid who worked for Enki and is attempted to build an escape from the world and the Shattering. He thinks Enki was right that eternal growth over sustainability is paramount. He also believe that Enki didn't go far enough. He plans to completely destroy the Obtala and use the Ultracircus as a raft to get to the next realm. He's not evil, but like Thanos, his plan is misguided. He has Horr'off locked up.~~

✅ ~~What is Gef's story? Who was Gef working for? Is Wacamolo more than he lets on—like Fizban?~~

+ The villain of this story did what he did out of love; he didn't mean for the destruction to happen. But so long as its happened, he sees it as progress. We now know that he did it to find some infinite energy source.

+ ~~Po eats the Texo Compass~~

+ Evo was a member of the council. She alone among scientists of the council re-discovered the ability to create synthezoids; inside herself! I have no idea how this was accomplished or if it made her sick but she needs to tell Able at the end! She created a child synthezoid in the hopes of creating a true form of optimism and balance and sustainability in opposition to Gabriel's ideas of constant growth. She felt that a failing of the synthezoids was that they were born knowing everything and could never be truly emphatic.

✅~~Ghendra was Evo's student.~~

✅~~The crew meets a thing like Nip but massive and dangerous.~~ (The crew meets something like the puzzles in the Automatic Jungle.)

✅~~The crew has to make their way through a jungle of nanotechnology that tries to transform them.~~

✅~~Rilla and Wacamolo show up with Arthra and stuff at the entrance to the city of Horn.~~

✅~~Nip becomes a swarm. Arthra learns to fly (by walking on copies of Nip).~~

+ Baron Leocadia sends bounty hunters after the crew.

+ The crew acquires a fighter of some kind. Do they free a mechanoman?
