# Chapter 14

## In which the crew meets the Big Net.

The twelve Myconese in their fungus armor, used bags of smoke to clear the webs, the strands of the thick structure disintegrating in front of the crews' eyes. Before they knew it, they were back to looking at puffballs growing on mushrooms growing on toadstools growing on bunts and rusts, all the way up to the sky. Twelve more towering creatures emerged from the woods that the Myconese mounted. They looked like piles of twigs crawling around on a eight tiny legs. With six on each side of Arthra, the Myconese began to lead the crew through the fungal forest.

Gef advised Wacamolo that at least they were heading in generally the right direction, closer to the crater Nuktut Togait.

Able couldn't take his eyes off of Po's new adornment. "Does it hurt?" Able asked, gingerly touching the small cluster of mushrooms now sprouting out of Po's top. Po let out a sequence of beeps that sounded like nonchalance, as in, "You know it kind of tickles but not enough to bother me."

Able closed his eyes and thought, *Hello?* and waited, but nothing happened. There was an eerie silence inside his head. He looked around. Come to think of it, there was a an eerie silence everywhere. The fungal forest was very still, the slightest of breezes pushing soft spores through the air with no sound. The canopy of the forest almost totally obscured the sky, which where you could see it now, was a turquoise green. 

They began to travel downward for a time until they came to a  rock wall with a massive stone gate. As they approached, the canopy of the forest opened up to reveal more and more of the wall. Gef said to the crew, "I think this is the edge of the crater." Positioned all along the rock wall, many Myconese rose from the surroundings like plants at high speed. (High-speed for a plant.) There appeared to be at least a hundred, all on the wall, up and down and around the gate. But all this commotion, still no sound.

The gates were entirely circular, except where at the bottom the circle was flat enough for the road to pass through—if you could call what they were on a road. Stones were stacked in an arch, each one leaning slightly more than the last until they met vertically at the top. All around the stacked stones were carvings of leaves and ivy, toadstools and brackets. Near the top of the gates stood two large statues of spiders, carved into recesses so that they appeared to be coming out of the cliffside.

The low rumbling from the campsite returned to fill the insides of the crew, but much louder this time, like a thousand monks humming the lowest note possible. As it increased in power, the gates began to open.

"Is this really such a good idea? We'll be trapped." asked Wacamolo of Gef.

"I don't think they mean us any harm. They're taking us into their home."

"They weren't all pointing at you."

The gates, despite their size and thickness, made very little sound, lifting as they opened so that they never even touched the ground. The troop, the twelve Myconese, their prickly mounts, Arthra and the crew, all began to make their way into the gates. As they passed through, many of the durian that had been standing around the gates, melted back into the fungus brush, disappearing from view.

*Bello!* Able heard a voice in his head again, this one solitary. He looked around and saw the lead Myconese on his right, turned around in his saddle, looking at Able with the glossy eyes in his mushroom cap. *It be dark here. But you of eyes, so we will light for you. Do not worry.*

As the darkness of the cavernous tunnel began to set in with the gates closing, fungus all along the walls and ceiling began to glow with green and blue light. It was a soft light, but it lit the tunnel well enough for the crew to see one another.

"Wow," said Rilla, muffled behind her mask.

"Yeah," Said Able.

Wacamolo picked up Po, "My little friend, you must endeavor to remember as much of this as you can! I think we are the first to see it in a long time."

Po scanned the walls of the tunnel, the plant life, even the guards and their mounts, who did not seem to take any notice. Wacamolo said to Gef, "I doubt they see in our spectrum of light."

Gef smiled. "No. In fact, I think I'm tuned into the spectrum they're seeing in. It's highly ultraviolet."

"That's no fair," said Wacamolo.

Gef shrugged.

"If we were at my shop, I'd put together a nice pair of goggles."

"Wish I could loan you my eyes, Waca."

The procession moved along for a time, the tunnel growing wider and some traffic coming the other direction. There were side passages and larger doors along the tunnel walls. At times, the main tunnel split in two. At every step of the way, they were traveling down and it began to get warmer, with a light steam forming in the air.

"Do you think they know about the gas in the crater and that perhaps we should not go near it?" asked Wacamolo of Gef.

"Well, whatever they are, they're also organic. It's probably poisonous to them as well. I'd keep that gas mask on though."

* * *

After hours of trundling along corridors leading to larger corridors, the tunnel the procession was in opened into a massive cavern, as large as the tree museum beneath Horn. The ceiling was still covered in bioluminescent fungus, but the individual glow of the fungus blended together into something like a sky that was the color of mint.

On the far side of the cavern there were all manner of dancing blue lights, racing at times from the bottom of the cavern to the top and vice versa. Each light would leave an afterglow behind it revealing a massive net structure that consumed an entire side of the cavern.

*The big net* said a voice inside Able's head. *Approach the stand.* Their escort had stopped and moved away from the crew into the shadows. Ahead of them a hundred meters was a large dias with a spiral ramp that lead to its top another fifty meters off the ground. Able spoke up, "They want us to go to the top of that."

"Okay then," said Gef and gave a flip of the reins. Arthra started forward, but upon reaching the ramp, merely reared up, hooking here front feet across the top and pulling them all up, everyone hanging on to whatever they could on her back. The dias was large enough to hold Arthra with room to spare, so the crew dismounted and came to stand at the edge of the platform, where the net surrounded them.

*Greetings* they all heard in their heads. The crew exchanged glances to see that each had heard the voice. Gef spoke first, "Greetings, Big Net!"

Laughter permeated their minds. *This is what your small inorganic heard. We are the Magnus Kindui. You are close enough to hear us well now and we are close enough to be more clear. It takes many minds to make ourselves clear and many of your minds to show us the right thoughts to present. The little inorganic among you has a small thought repository.*

Rilla punched Able in the shoulder, "He said you're dumb."

"Rilla," said Waca, placing his hand on her shoulder. "This is neither the time nor place."

"Well," said Gef, staring at the vast colors and temperatures pouring across the Magnus Kindui—which for all the world looked like a brain—"we did not mean to invade your land or even disturb you. Our intention was to get to the other side of Nuktut Togait, to the hanging city of Boisenval."

*Yes. This we know. Word of you and yours has traveled through the firmycelium to all of us. We did not bring you here because we fear you. We are many and we are strong. We fear none but one. Among you there are two inorganics, two nomex, one insect, and three we do not understand and have never seen before; cannot see.*

Gef had a thought and turned to look at Po and Nip and Ka'Rollly. With his vision set to the spectrum matching the Myconese's he could not see Po and Nip at all! Of Ka'Rolly, he could only see Rolly. He switched back to his normal vision and saw the three of them right there with the group.

"These are, well, that is part of the reason we wish to go to Boisenval. We seek knowledge about many things and we believe that knowledge may be there."

*You seek the Lady Vivian.*

"Yes. We do."

A disturbing hum filled the cavern, it felt like fear. *This is the one we fear. Death awaits you in Boisenval.*

"Well, if you could tell us somewhere else to get the knowledge we seek, we would gladly go elsewhere."

*Amonst us once was one counted as Kiokesuimas, who was a scientist like the terror Vivian, but we have not heard his mind in a long time. He could've have told you much. But his memories are lost to us.*

There was a pause. Gef wasn't sure what to say other than maybe sorry, which seemed out of place.

*These non-organic, non-inorganic creatures among you. What are they?*

"I made them," offered Able.

*But what are they?*

"I don't know. I call them mistakes, but I have also heard them called programs."

*Program. We do not know this word.*

There was another long pause. It seemed the Magnus Kindui was deliberating, the lights on the wall growing in intensity and speed.

*What will you do when you meet the terror Vivian?*

"Well, technically we were sent to destroy her, but—"

The whole cavern appeared to light up at once. *DESTROY!? YOU! HOW!?*

The whole crew instinctively covered there ears and bent over from the intensity of the thoughts. "Please," shouted Gef, "your thoughts are hurting us!"

The cavern calmed down. *We apologize, but this news is significant to us. We wish to join your cause.*

"Yes, but that isn't really our cause. We just want information. Maybe she will give it to us if we ask."

*The terror Vivian offers nothing without extracting a price. You will get no knowledge unless you destroy her and take it for yourself. There is a path from here to Boisenval, beneath 
Nuktut Togait. We will send many of us to go with you.*

"I must be clear. We do not want to destroy *anyone*."

*Even the nomex among you? They are so good at it.*

"I say," said Wacamolo, "I do not appreciate such statements. All nomex are not alike. We think for ourselves, and I, for one, and Rilla as well, do not like fighting."

Rilla said under her breath, "I like fighting."

*She likes fighting. We can sense it.*

"She is a child. She will grow wiser with age and education."

*There is no value in peace for the sake of peace. The terror Vivian is more powerful than us so we do not fight. But she is a threat and we would fight if we could. We have learned patience; we have not lost the will to fight.*

"Well, we do not wish to fight. We seek knowledge. That is all."

*We will accompany you to Boisenval. We will see if there is merit in your claim that you may seek only knowledge. We will see if you survive the encounter. If you do not, we have lost nothing. If you do, we wish to share in the knowledge. In many ways, the Magnus Kindui is knowledge.*

Gef turned to Wacamolo and Rilla and Able. "I don't think we can say no."

Wacamolo shrugged, "I can't see the harm in some guards going with us. I don't think we want to look like an invading army when we get to Boisenval..."

Gef nodded, "Exactly." He turned back to the cavern wall, "How many of you will go with us?"

*The same that brought you here. This is the most courageous part of Magnus Kindui. We shall bear new ones should the terror Vivian destroy them. You may call them Minus Gendoku. They will show you to Boisenval and will assist you in any way they can. You will show patience with them. The further from the Magnus Kindui they go, the harder it will be for them to communicate.*

"We greatly appreciate this gift—this assistance. And should we gain the knowledge we seek, we will share it with you, Magnus Kindui."

"Very well. We wish you luck. We grant you your loneliness."