# Chapter 17

## In which Vivian repairs the land.

In an instant, water erupted from the ground. Buildings made of stone appeared to repair themselves. The people who had been in the mechanomen suits woke and looked at their hands in amazement and then hugged one another and laughed and cried. The baron simply vanished. Where the main city tower had been covered in bent spires, it grew smooth and the stone changed from ochre to torquoise, causing the entire city to be brighter. People stepped out of their homes and smiled smiles that had not been seen in years.

With that, Vivian turned and put her hand on Able's head. "Let's go home, little Able." The world seemed to catch on fire again with that blue electricity and they were back in her chambers. Vivian left Able's side to return to her chair. Able watched as she sat and the Dustfish left her side to rejoin its newly formed body, and Po and Nip appeared in Able's view and nuzzled his head.

Able turned and watch Gef and Wacomolo and Rilla come from out of their stares. Rilla raced to hug Able, and shouted his name. Vivian smiled and tears streamed down her cheeks. "Child," she said to Rilla, her voice almost appearing in Rilla's head. Rilla looked in fear. "Do you love him?"

Rilla stood up and held Able's hand, "Sorta'."

Vivian laughed. Then she said, "But you know what he is?"

"My friend."

At this Vivian laughed again.

Gef and Wacamolo had walked up behind the children. Gef bent down to Able's ear and whispered, "What in Gaea's name is going on, little buddy?"

Able turned to face him, "I think it's going to be okay." He turned back to Vivian. "What happened to the Baron?"

"Only you could care about that filth."

Able stared.

"He will stay with his books—his stolen knowledge—in his tower for the rest of his days."

Able made a face.

"It's necessary, little one. It's necessary."

"Did you fix the soldiers too?"

"The Myconese? Yes. And in good time, I will remove the smog from the crater, too. That will be more difficult, Able, because it is not my realm."

Able looked out the window, past the new, bright blue city of Horn, to the Idex Mortez. It remained barren and gray. "And the Idex Mortez?"

"It belonged and continues to belong to your mother, Able. I'm afraid there's not much I can do about that either."

"Well," said Able unsure of what to say for a moment. "These are my friends. This is Rilla," and Able swung their hands in the air. With his other hand he gestured behind him, "This is Gef. He's the one looking for the Cyclo. And that's Wacamolo—he's very wise."

Vivian nodded and smiled. "Hello all."

Everyone gestured their greetings.

Vivian leaned forward, putting her elbows on her knees, a curiosity in her eyes, as the whole room brightened with her. "Well then, little Able. What's next?"

* * *

Able mostly wanted to know who Vivian was and how she knew his mother, so she made comfortable chairs for all of them and told them a story.

"Many, many eons ago, this world was created by the makers. We know the names of some of them, but not all. We know they do not exist in this universe. You could travel through all of space and time and never find them, and yet we know they used to watch us. They do not watch us anymore.

The world was very balanced. There was more than enough for everyone to have whatever they needed. We, scientists, learned a great deal about how the world worked. Through trial and error, we were able to understand the underlying rules of the world." She lifted her hand and bade Nip to come near her. When she held out her hand, Nip settled into it. She looked at Able, "This is a—"

"Nip," said Able.

Vivian smiled, "Nip is a program." She grasped it and turned it over and it made a "woah" kind of sound. "Relax little one, I mean you no harm." She looked to Able again, "How you are able to create this intuitively without understanding first principles, I do not know. However, with the right knowledge and with the use of energy, programs can be made and tasked and even copied." She tossed Nip in the air where it vibrated and split into three Nips! Able gasped. The others were merely amused. Nip 1 and Nip 2 and Nip 3 all began investigating each other, hovering in circles around one another, all three in a swirl moving around the air up towards the high ceiling.

"These are wondrous programs you've made, but you all should know—" she looked around the room at each person and held their gaze for a moment before she said, "We are all programs."

Wacamolo jumped out of his seat, Gef put his head in his hands, Rilla looks perplexed and Able stared in wonder. Ka'Rolly jumped and down raising its arms in the air. "Yes," said Vivian, "you are the strangest one of all." She stood up from her chair and walked over to where Ka'Rolly was jumping. It stopped and began to back away.

"It's all right Ka'rolly. She's okay now."

Vivian looked at Able with a mocking look, and then said, "Yes, Ka'rolly is it? I won't hurt you. I am merely curious. You are the first new thing I have seen in a long, long time."

Ka'Rolly stood still as Vivian brought her face very close to the glass sphere where the dustfish floated. It did a small somersault and Vivian chuckled. "Curious."

Vivian began walking slowly in a circle around the room, each bare foot leaving behind a briefly glowing footprint. "There were twelve scientists from around the world that found each other. I was one. Your mother, Able, was another. We formed a council. I met my husband Gabriel through the council. Together  we began to create new things, new vistas. And we had rules by which to operate; a way to keep things in balance."

"But Gabriel believed there was no need to conserve energy. He believed it could be found elsewhere; an infinite amount of energy somewhere else. He believed he could take it from the world of the makers. He is gone now, where I do not know, but in truth, I lost him then, to his work. He was obsessed. He would do nothing but research and write and build machines. He built the Ultracircus. Truly, it was a beautiful machine and home to for council, but... Evo, who had become by sister by then, never cared for it. She would come to us for council meetings, but she stayed far out in the wildernesses."

Vivian came to stand in front of the group, in front of Able. "She created a device called a Texo Compass. She created more than one, but only one was ever tied to the Ultracircus. Vivian knelt down in front of Able. "You, Able, are that Texo Compass." She smiled.

Able's eyes grew very wide. "But I... but I don't even know..." Able looked at Gef who just laughed out loud. He looked at Wacamolo who said, "Fascinating." He looked at Rilla who made her eyes wide and said, "I can see your b-o-o-o-nes, Able!" and cackled. He looked at Vivian and just said, "How?"

"I'm not sure about that." She stood up and walked away back to her chair. "I know this: Gabriel created something in his lab in the Grimoire Mountain that, rather than as he desired, began stealing energy from this world. He built a kind of gate and it swallowed him and has since been draining this world, this universe, of all of its energy. You see Able, I cannot just fix it. This universe is dying and I do not understand what Gabriel did. None of who is left of the council does."

"Without the council united, with Evo having gone missing, with others trying to stave off the destruction, all balance was lost. We have staked our claims and we do what we can to maintain existence but eventually, we will all fail."

"I cannot leave my domain. Without me here to protect it, it will only fade faster. I do believe I can find Horr'of, the council member in whose domain the Myconese live. Or, if I can prove that he is gone, I can take over his domain and help the people there. I am not so sure about the Idex Mortez. I will try, but Evo's science was always so strange to me. I mean, just look at you," she looked at Able and smiled a smile of sheer joy. "Amazing."

Wacamolo raised his hand, "If I may ask, m'lady—"

"Please. Just Vivian."

"Um. Yes. Vivian. I am a student of science myself—to no such degree as yourself—but is it possible to learn more?"

"It is possible. The members of the council were all self-taught. But for reasons that are my own, I will not help you."

"I see."

"And Gef," she said.

Gef sat up straight and looked worried.

"Able has told me that you seek answers from the Cyclopedia."

"Yes."

"You will find it at the Ultracircus. It will have the answers you're looking for."

"I'm sorry, but if you know that, do you not also know the answer to the question I seek."

"I made a bargain. To break that bargain would have grave consequences, so I cannot tell you the answers. But, look, you found Able—"

"Heh. Able found me."

"Yes. Either way, the two of you together, I am certain, will find what you seek."

Wacamolo asked, "Is it possible for you to tell us who the other members of the council are? Perhaps we might seek there help?"

Vivian held her hand up by her head and pinched all her fingers together. A book materialized out of the air. She took hold of it and walked it over to Wacamolo. "Here, curious master. This is a guide to the world written by Remory, one of the council of Twelve. It will tell you a great deal."

Wacamolo took the book with grave respect, his mouth wide open in wonder.

Just then, Po bumped up against Vivian's ankle. She bent down and picked it up. "And what can I do for you, little one?"

Po glowed and began trying to copy Vivian. She winced and gasped and held it away from her, but she couldn't let it go. "No!" She shouted as Po tried to wind its way into her mind. "No!"

Able jumped up and grabbed Po and yanked him out of her hands. Vivian stepped back, a hand to her head, gasping for breath. "No," she whispered.

"I'm sorry. Po does that. I don't think it means anything by it; it's just its purpose."

"That..." Vivian stammered, "That program is dangerous, Able. That program is dangerous!" She gathered herself and stood again, once again visibly angry, but also frightened. "If it were not your creation I would destroy it. Beware of that creation, Able. It is *dangerous*. Keep it close."

"I'm sorry."

"It is all right, but after that, I must go. These memories... I want to see my sister's grave. It has been too long. I have things to let go of."

"I thought you couldn't leave your domain?"

"When I leave this domain, I will be almost powerless. But it doesn't matter. There is something I must see for myself." She again knelt before Able. "Goodbye, Able. I do hope our paths cross again, but I do not know if they will. Find the Ultracircus. Become what your mother intended you to become." She stood and looked at Able's friends. "Take good care of him. The future of everything may depend on it."

"Goodbye," and with that she faded into nothing.

End of Part 1