# Chapter 18

## In which the party has a moment to rest.

As if coming out of a long sleep, the crew began to talk to each other and gather their thoughts. Able told them everything that had happened with Vivian, how they had got where they were, and the City of Horn. They all gathered at the window at the top of Vivian's tower and looked out and saw how the city had changed. But they also saw the limits of Vivian's power. The land had not grown suddenly bushy and green, merely a little brighter, a little more blue.

"Well," said Gef. "We came a long way to get here and she didn't tell us to leave. I say we rest and gather our thoughts, maybe explore this place."

Wacamolo added, "Some of us could eat."

"Of course," said Gef. We'll start by looking for a kitchen. Then Gef looked to the Nips, who were still chasing themselves in circles, "And what about that?"

Able looked up in wonder. "Hey, Nip!" All three Nips stopped and then came down to Able and began chirping at him all at once with apparent questions. Able put his hands up. "I don't know."

Rilla prodded Able, "You can't all them all Nip. They need new names."

Able considered this. "Would you all like your own names?"

The Nips all seemed to say no.

Able looked at Rilla and shrugged. "It was a good idea, but they seem to just want to be called Nip."

"That's weird," said Rilla.

The nips spun in a circle and approached Rilla's face. Then they quickly stopped in place, turned purple and made farting sounds. They seemed to agree this was funny and flew away. "Rude!" said Rilla loudly.

"C'mon, kids. Let's find some eats. Nip is still—whatever it was in the first place."

* * *

It turned out there was a beautiful kitchen, which the group thought was strange because it didn't seem like Vivian would have eaten. They gathered around a large wooden table and Rilla and Wacamolo tore apart bread and picked out strange fruit. Able told them all about how when Vivian had hugged him, she felt like a skeleton.

Rilla said, "That's sad."

Able replied, "I think she was sad. I think she was very sad."

Wacamolo added, "I think she has lost a great many things." He turned the page in his book while chewing on bread, "Now that we know more about how the world has changed, I can see why she would be so broken-hearted."

There was fruit and bread to eat, but other than that, only ingredients. Only Wacamolo knew how to cook, so he set about making a soup for Rilla, but that's when they appeared. From doors around the kitchen, nomex appeared. There were men and women and they looked nomex, but they were of a very thin, slight build, in many ways having an appearance like Vivian, but smaller.

"Greetings," said Gef.

"Greetings, lord," said one of the new people.

"Lord? Oh no, we are just—"

"You are here Lady Vivian's guests. We have been instructed to look after you by her until such a time as your are ready to leave." And with that, the group of eight nomex bowed.

"Oh please," waved Gef, "Don't do that."

The eight nomex stood, but did not seem to acknowledge Gef. The one who had spoken before spoke again, "My name is Rayfe. These people, my family, have helped Lady Vivian and watched over her tower for many generations. We are eternally grateful to you for what you have accomplished. For many, many years, she has sat in her room, bereft, and only wishing to be left alone. Our land, her domain, as you could see from the lake, deteriorated without her care. But come," Rayfe waved them over to a window in the kitchen. "Look at the lake now!"

The lake of Boisenval was beautiful again, shining blue under a blue sky. The people of the Hanging City had gathered around its edges and were playing and splashing and swimming. Rayfe continued, "It hasn't been like that in a very long time. So we thank you. If there is anything you desire, we will do our best to provide it."

"Well," said Gef, "I sure would like to know where my Pede is."

"Of course!" said a nomex woman. "She is well and in the stables at the base of the tower. I myself—I am Cara—have seem to it that she was fed a healthy diet of rotting leaves and fungus. I have never cared for such a one, but I've cared for many other animals, and I believe she is quite content."

"That's a relief," said Gef. He looked to the others, "We don't know where we're going, but I have a good idea of some supplies we're going to need. Why don't we all put together a list?"

Wacamolo raised his hand, "Is any among you a chef?"

Another man stepped forward, "Indeed! I am Aron and I cook for the staff. Would you perhaps like me to prepare something?"

"Please!" Said Wacamolo. "Thank you, my good man. While I know how to cook, it is but a trifle I am sure compared to your abilities. I and my—" he looked at Rilla, "my very good friend, will greatly appreciate it."

This seemed to make Aron very happy and he set about the kitchen banging doors and pans and pots and plates. One of the woman with the new group curtsied in front of the crew and said "I'm Gerta," and then immediately set about cleaning the table and putting out dishes and silverware.

Rilla and Able had taken to each grabbing a Nip and hiding it somewhere in the kitchen while the third Nip raced about the room searching. Able wasn't sure if this was fun or if they didn't like being separated. He considered it an experiment to see what they would do. And each time one of the Nips found another they sang a song at each other as though they hadn't seen each other in ages. Then they would orbit each other and seek out the third.

Rayfe, standing next to Gef, said, "What fantastic creatures."

Gef smiled, "You've no idea." Gef perked up and looked around the room suddenly, having remembered something. He began looking all around the kitchen, underneath and in things, until he found Po, off in a corner of a pantry, sitting in the shadows, glowing a dark purple color. "Hey, buddy."

Po turned slowly back and forth and sighed.

Gef picked it up and held it. Po sighed again. "I don't care what she said. You're certainly no danger to me. You already copied me, remember?"

Po made a light illusion of Gef planting a garden.

Gef looked on, puzzled. "What's this, then?"

Po blooped.

"Is this a dream, Po? Did this happen and I can't remember it?"

Po sighed.

"Well, you stick with me. We'll figure out together what's going on. Whatever she said, she also said you were important. Don't lose sight of that, ok."

Po blooped.

"All right."

Gef carried Po back to the table and set him down. Ka'Rolly, who had been sitting at the table the whole time, reached out and pat Po gently. Po rolled over to Ka'Rolly and turned a brighter shade of purple. Po projected a light model of a dustfish up to Ka'Rolly's "face" and the two swam about in unison.

Gef went back to Rayfe who was talking with the rest of his people. "Do any of you know how to write?"

Rayfe looked surprised—all of his people did. "Of course. We all do."

"Would it be much trouble to ask one of you to take minutes for a bit, while my crew and I try to figure some thing out?"

"I will do it," said a young, female nomex, in a long, leather coat, stepping forward. She had short, spiky blonde hair and blue eyes the color of which Gef could not remember seeing before.

"Yes, Rayfe," said. "This is Nicolle. She is the brightest among us. She can take your minutes and also answer any questions that might come up. The Lady Vivian took a special interest in her and she even knows much science."

Gef raised his eyebrows and held out his hand, "It is a pleasure, Nicolle. Thank you."

Nicolle hesitated to take Gef's hand. He was a machine, after all. But she decided she wanted to know more and shook it. "I hope I can help."

With that, and with Aron presenting Wacamolo and Rilla with beautiful plates of leafy vegetables and tubers, drizzled in some sauce and seasoned with a crumbled cheese, the crew all sat down to the table and began to discuss plans while Nicolle took down the time and noted questions they came up with and answered the ones she could. Wacamolo, with Remory's guide, tried to add thoughts about where they could go and what council members they might seek out.

Rilla noticed that Able seemed very lost in thought, adding little to the conversation. "Are you okay, Able?" She whispered while the others conversed.

"I don't know how to be a Texo Compass." Able said.

"Ask one of the adults. Maybe Ms. Nicolle knows. She seems to know a lot. And I like her hair," she said, while tugging on her own dusty dreadlocks.

"I don't think so, Rilla. I think it's like my eyesight, or speaking with the Durman hive. It's something I—it's something I don't know about myself."

"Well, if we aren't going to find out from them and I don't care about where we're going, let's just go explore the tower. We can find Arthra!" She whispered with excitement.

Wacamolo spied the two whispering fervently. He leaned over to them. "Children, you don't have to stay for this if you don't want to. Rilla, have you had enough to eat?"

Rilla nodded.

"Then go play."

They both smiled and Able said, "Can we go find Arthra?"

"Yes."

Wacamolo wrapped the table and said, "Could someone please show the children where Arthra is? And please corral them back here by sunset?"

Cara volunteered. "I would like to check on the—what did you call it? Pete?"

"Rilla laughed. "Pede!"

"Yes," said Cara and showed the children out.

Nicolle watched them leave. She turned to Gef, "He is a machine child?"

Gef said, "I know, right?"

"Is he your child?"

"Oh no. No. I don't—I wouldn't know how—"

Nicolle nodded. "I understand."

Gef shook his head. "We found out today that a council member created him. But beyond that, and his ability to make these programs"—Gef pointed at Nip and Po and Ka'Rolly—" we don't know much else about him."

Nicolle looks wistful. "A machine child. I'd never thought or heard of such a thing."

"Yeah. No one has. Not even Vivian."