# Chapter 20

## Onward and Upward

There was more than enough electrol to supercharge all the mistakes. And with the supercharging, generating the guidance system that was Po, the Nips and Able became even easier. The crew tested it again from the top of Vivian's tower and it shot off to the horizon north again. All of Boisenval came out to look a the bright blue beam steadily shining out of Vivian's tower off in to the evening sky as the sun set. Rumors were everywhere about what was happening; mostly that new scientists had arrived to help Lady Vivian.

As Gef saw it, they had two problems now. One, how much electrol to transport with them. Arthra could carry a lot, but could they count on it being in whatever new place they were going? And then, the more obvious problem was that if they had to head north past the Cullen Mountains, would they have to cross the Silt Sea and how? They would need a silt glider and those were very difficult to come by. One problem at a time.

That same evening, there was a very strange funnel cloud in the distance, coming from out of Nuktut Togait. It was almost as if the gas that had been there was being vacuumed out. The crew stood at the window and Nicolle put her hand to the glass. "Vivian," she whispered.

Gef was next to her and heard. "She is amazing."

Nicolle brought her hand down to her side and turned to Gef with a look of determination. "I want to come with you."

Gef was not really surprised. All of her questions—so many unanswered—all her investment in the notes, the thinking. She had illustrated things as well and Gef thought she was an exceptional artist. "I certainly don't have a problem with that."

And even though she did not have to, she explained, "Without Vivian here, there's not much for me—nothing new anyway. She did not say goodbye, but she left me this letter."

"Have you read it?"

"No. I can't."

"I understand. Saying goodbye can be difficult."

"Yes," she said and put the letter to her heart. "But, I can help you and Able and everyone. I've never been outside of the valley, but I'm a quick study."

"I believe you," said Gef. "And, uh," he looked at Rilla who had her face pressed against the glass making her nose press up like a pig. "I'm pretty sure you have an admirer."

Nicolle looked and then smiled. "She is a wild child."

"That she is. But she saved Able's life, I think."

"Really?"

"Yeah. Back in Kinton Station. We had a run-in with some folks who don't care much for synthezoids."

"I'm sorry. That's terrible—that kind of close-mindedness."

Gef smiled. "I'm used to it."

Nicolle looked him in the eyes, "You shouldn't have to be."

"Thank you."

Vivian's staff had already gathered everything the crew had decided they would need in their planning session. It was all packed away in sacks and trunks in the stable with lots of sturdy ribbons to hang it off Arthra.

That evening, the crew gathered in the kitchen once more to a meal, now with some maps laid out and the laser's trajectory nicely filled in by Wacamolo with the use of one of his mechanical devices. "The laser does not travel through an easy pass, unfortunately," he said. "We will have to pass through the Cullen to the West. And then, on the other side, we can head North-Northeast to pick up where the laser was. I suggest we fire it again at that spot." He measured with a straightedge and marked an x.

Gef said "Equally unfortunate is that neither Waca nor I nor anyone else knows what is there. We need to be ready for anything. And I mean, anything. Kids, I had Rayfe and his people make adjustments to a special cabinet that you can use to hide, if need be. It is ab-so-lute-ly important that if we tell you to hide, you do it and you stay quiet. Do you understand?"

Rilla and Able nodded with plenty of apprehension.

"Good. And it's also important that you obey other members of the crew. When Waca or Ms. Nicolle or I tell you to do something, you need to listen, whether you like it to not."

Rilla and Able smiled—not the reaction Gef was hoping for.

"All right," Gef said. "Let's enjoy ourselves for a bit and get to bed early. We leave at sunrise."

As the group chatted and some dessert was brought out, Nicolle approached Ka'Rolly who was sitting on a stool in the corner, staring at its hands.

"Hello," said Nicolle. "I'm Nicolle." She held out her hand. "It's nice to meet you."

Ka'Rolly straightened up and Rolly put its face near the glass, but it did not put its hand out.

Nicolle bent over and took Ka'Rolly's hand in both of hers and shook it up and down. To her, it felt like turning a crank. Ka'Rolly made a whistle and Rolly did a summersault in its bowl.

Gef saw what was happening and stepped over. "I know what you're thinking," he said.

"Do you?" She replied.

"What's it thinking?"

Ka'Rolly still sat straight up but did nothing more than look at Gef.

Nicolle smiled, "Actually, yes."

"He saved my life once."

"Bunch of life-savers you lot are."

"Yeah. It picked me up in the Baron's tower and jumped out a window when the baron's mechanomen were after us. It must have been a forty story fall, but he landed like he was landing on a pillow."

Nicolle looked at Ka'Rolly, "Amazing." She paused. "Why do you say 'it'?"

"Oh. Uh, well. Yeah. That's a difficult one. I mean, my people, we don't have genders. But when we get older, we often pick one. I doubt you could tell the difference between a she or he synthezoid. Ka'Rolly here... I mean, I suppose the fish has a gender, but Ka doesn't."

"This fish isn't Ka'Rolly?"

"No. The fish is Rolly. The body is Ka, one of Able's programs. They've been... working together for a while... look, I really don't know."

Ka'Rolly suddenly made a motion with its arms, undulating like they were waves and Rolly sank to the bottom of the head and swam in circles while Ka made zooming sounds.

"See?" Said Gef.

"Not really," said Nicolle, shaking her head in wonder.

* * *

In the morning, the crew awoke and made their way to the stable. Gef led Arthra out to the square in front of Vivian's tower. The crew and Vivian's staff began packing things onto the centipede, who was anxious to get moving, chittering with pleasure. They tied a large net across Athra's back and began attaching seats, corked vases, trucks large and small. Gef pet Arthra on the face above her mouth, "Quite a hall we managed to get, huh girl?" Gef looked around at everyone busying themselves and sighed, "Quite a crew."

As everyone worked to get Arthra ready, the villagers began to make their way into the square. Gradually, as the crowd gathered, they began to talk and many did not seem entirely pleased. Several had pulled Rafye aside and were asking many questions. Gef watched with discomfort. He had a bad feeling. Maybe another hurried exit might be called for? He found and gathered Waca, Nicolle, Rilla and Able. "I want you all to get in your placed on Arthra now. Let the staff and Ka'Rolly and I finish the packing."

"Is something the matter, Gef?" Able asked.

"Not yet."

"No," said Nicolle. "I'll handle this." She was wearing her best exploration gear: leather coveralls with padded knees and elbows, a belt with various items, and a pack. Her hair was smooth back by a band of leather and feathered in the back. She went over to Rayfe and the other boisenvalians in their discussion.

"Is something wrong, Rayfe?"

"People are concerned that Lady Vivian is not here."

Nicolle turned to the gathered villagers. "Look around. Look at what Lady Vivian has repaired. Look to the East. Lady Vivian has removed the poison from Nuktut Togait. She is also helping the Durman, a people who, unlike us, lost the protection of their scientist. Believe me, my friends, Lady Vivian is with us."

"What of these strangers?" asked one villager. "What are they here for?"

"They were here to help Lady Vivian and now they must travel on to find the Ultracircus."

Many in the crowd gasped. "That's a myth!" Shouted one woman.

"I think the laser beam you all saw last night should tell you otherwise. That is to be a beacon for us, so that we can find it."

"Lady Nicolle," said an old man, "You must leave too?"

Nicolle was shocked. She had never been referred to as 'Lady' before. She spoke calmly through her nerves, "Yes. I feel I can best serve all of us by going with these travelers."

"But what will finding the mythical city accomplish?"

"If we find it, we may—we *may*— be able to stop the wound at the center of the world—stop the Shattering."

People cried out, in awe, in disbelief, joy and dismay.

"Lady Vivian will return. We will return. I promise. Remain steadfast. Take care of each other. You can see. The world is already getting better."

The old man who had referred to Nicolle as Lady, approached. "My good Lady," he bowed and Nicolle blushed. "I am but a humble jeweler by the name of Toban."

"Toban," Nicolle said in a low tone, "You have made many wondrous things for Lady Vivian. I know who you are. Please stop bowing."

"Of course. But here. I wish for you to have this." He held out a ring in his shaky hand. It was a silver band, encasing a small shining, blue orb. The orb looked as though it had shifting smoke inside of it. "It carries with it some of Lady Vivian's nanosphere. I can not be sure, but I hope it will help keep you safe."

Nicolle took the ring. "Thank you, Toban. Thank you very much," and she hugged him. After that, she walked away from the crowd to a smattering of applause and some cheering. "Goodbye, friends! We won't be long!" though she was sure that couldn't be true. She climbed aboard Arthra and sat on the padded platform that Gef and Waca occupied toward the front. "Well, that's settled."

Gef looked back over his shoulder. "Thanks. That's a much improved exit from our last two."

Waca pat Nicolle on the back, "Very true. You are a born leader. But I guess you must take a journey first. All great leaders do, you know."

Nicolle smiled at them both.

Gef shook the reigns and Arthra trundled off towards the Cullen mountains.