# Chapter 22

## The World Begins to Turn Steel

As the crew descended out of the Cullen Mountains, the robots that had been throwing boulders the night before now looked like disheveled temples abandoned at the side of the trail. They sat or knelt as if they had collapsed, some even lying down on the ground as if they had exhausted themselves in the night. Their bodies were metal, but the metal was rough and grooved and rusted. They were adorned with stone armor that had gathered moss. They all also had patches of dark paneled areas that looked like glass. Able remembered just these kinds of panels on the upside-down beetle at Ghendra's house and he told Waca of this.

"Likely sun collectors of some kind," Waca hypothesized. "Might explain their dormancy this morning if they worked all night."

The path became a similar mixture of materials, at times stone and natural-looking; at other times, scratched steel. In places Arthra even slipped because the ground was as smooth as glass and there was no surface rough enough for her microscopic hairs to latch to. The so-called "tree line" from the night before was made up of spikes that came up from the ground only to branch out into hundreds of smaller spikes and then "leaves" that were dark blue and made of glass.

As they traveled downward, perpendicular to the mountains, Gef pointed out hundreds of heavy cables that appeared to climb up an invisible surface. He estimated that must be where the wall of energy had stood the night before, resisting the boulders. "I'm not sure the robot giants last night were attacking Vivian's barrier," he said to Waca and Nicolle.

"What were they doing then do you think?" asked Waca.

"Those cables—" he pointed to the piles of black and silver tendrils rising up from the ground, clinging to nothing. "When the rocks hit the barrier and there was that shimmer of energy—is it possible that those were capable of syphoning off the energy?"

"It gives me hope that's why Vivian never mentioned the threat. Perhaps she knew it was no threat," said Nicolle.

It was early in the morning, the sun still rising in the North,  and Able and Rilla were asleep in their saddle, curled up like leaves facing each other. Po was with them, gently glowing. Ka'Rolly was tied to the nets behind the children's saddle. Nip was high overhead, ever vigilant.

"Should we stop and investigate?" Asked Waca.

"I don't know," said Gef. "I really don't want to wake one of these things up."

Nicolle said, "You said you would explain to me the difference between a synthezoid and a robot."

Wacamolo chuckled.

"What?" Nicolle asked the wizened old man.

"I have had this conversation several times with Gef. His opinions are... interesting."

"Well, let's have it then."

Gef said, "Everything—everyone is programmed."

"Every*one*," replied Nicolle.

"That's what I said," said Wacamolo looking off at the scenery.

Gef replied, "Yes."

"I am programmed?"

"Yes."

"Well, that makes no sense. I do whatever I want."

"Do you though?" Asked Gef.

"Yes."

"Okay." Waca began chuckling as Gef turned and tossed something to Nicolle. She caught it easily. It was a trinket, a metal nothing. She examined it. "What is this?"

"Doesn't matter," said Gef, "You caught it."

"What's that to do with anything?"

"You were programmed to do that."

"I chose to do that."

"Did you?"

Nicolle looked at Wacamolo who was watching her with curiosity. "Is this some game the two of you are having?"

Waca shook his head, so did Gef. "Try this: if you can choose to do whatever you want, don't think of Vivian. Don't imagine her face, what she sometimes wears. Don't think about what her voice sounds like."

"I—" all of those perceptions flooded Nicolle's imagination. "I—that's nothing. That's—" She couldn't help but think on Vivian and wonder where she was.

"Did you choose not to? Or, have you been programmed to remember when prompted?"

"That's how memory works. What sense would it make for me to have a memory if I did not recall things when I wanted to or was asked to?"

"I didn't ask you to. I asked you *not* to."

"I don't see a difference. You used her name. The word would be meaningless if I couldn't define it—picture it—give it context."

"You're not wrong."

They rode on for a while.

"One thing that Gef will take a very long time to get to if I don't step in is that—"

"You believe this nonsense?"

"Yes I do."

"But you're nomex. You're organic. No one programmed you."

"We're not saying that no *one* programmed us."

"I am," said Gef.

"Shush. You're confusing the matter."

"Will who then?" Asked Nicolle.

"That remains an open question," said Wacamolo.

"No it doesn't," said Gef.

"Shush."

"Programs can arise on their own—spontaneously."

For reasons of its own, Po had left the children's saddle and with care and some extended spindles, made its way to the adults' saddle.

"Oh, Hello," said Wacamolo to Po.

"At any rate," said Gef, "your claim about memory working a certain way is wrong. That is not how my memory works."

"Of course it is," said Nicolle.

"No. If you ask me to recall something—tell me to recall something, I do not have to. If I wanted to, I could take every memory I have of you and put it away and not know who you are anymore."

Waca leaned in to Nicolle, "He can do that and I would advise you not ask him to; it is troubling."

Nicolle looked at Po for a moment, in curiosity, reflected on inducing memory loss in oneself and replied, "That's dreadful."

"I think it's quite useful," said Gef

"How do you get your memories back once you've... removed them?"

"I've either written them down ahead of time or asked someone else to remember to tell me."

"What does all this have to do with robots?" Nicolle asked.

"It's a scale," said Gef, "a spectrum."

"A spectrum of what?"

"Of memory. Of the complexity of the instructions. nomex are quite complex. But you know you're smarter than a cat."

Nicolle thought about a cat she once knew. "I'm not so sure about that," she said with a giggle.

Wacamolo laughed with her. "I know what you mean."

"See?" said Gef. "How did the two of you just do that? How did you know what she meant, Waca? You synced up your brains. You both built simulations of cat behaviors, colored it in with the idea of cats being smart and voila, you knew what each other meant, and it was even funny."

Nicolle leaned in to Wacamolo this time and said conspiratorially, "He's quite daft."

Wacamolo giggled.

"Anyway," continued Gef, "robots are pretty low on that spectrum. They're given something to do and they do it regardless of cost or function or a lot of time, even changes in the environment. They just do."

Out of curiosity and boredom, Nicolle picked up Po and began to examine it. Po purred.

"Po," said Gef, "don't do it."

Po made an obligatory chirp.

"Do what?" Asked Nicolle.

Waca answered, "It likes to copy your brain."

Nicolle's eyes opened wide and she held Po away from her face. Po moaned. "Oh my," she said. She looked at Wacamolo. "What happens then?"

Waca shrugged. "You'll pass out for a minute. That's all I've heard happens."

"You haven't done it."

"No," said Wacamolo with some amount of indication that he would like to.

"It did it to me," said Gef, "and it's been weird ever since."

Po made a chittering sound, like laughter.

"What are you doing!" shouted Rilla right behind them, startling Wacamolo and Nicolle.

"Rilla!" said Nicolle. "Must you?"

Rilla knelt behind the saddle laughing hard. Able came up behind her and knelt down too. "I told her it would only be funny for her."

Wacamolo messed Rilla's hair and said, "Though it might have stopped my old heart, I thought it was funny."

The countryside around them had changed drastically now. Past the patchwork nature of the north side of the mountains, they were now coming to the foothills, which were like no foothills anyone had seen before. They were more like ramps, angular, iron, flattened on the tops. The strange mist that had been in the mountains sat here too, still thicker.

The hills were becoming lower and even flattening. Nicolle turned to look behind them and see the Cullen mountains sticking up out of the clouds. They were still close, but fading, the way home for her disappearing.

"I like your hair," said Rilla.

Nicolle was surprised by the non-sequitur. She touched her hair, "Oh. Thank you."

"It's a pretty color."

Nicolle smiled.

"I like your skin, too." Without warning, Rilla placed her hand on Nicolle's and the dark color of her skin contrasted with Nicolle's.

"Thank you," said Nicolle. She leaned in to Rilla, "You know, I quite like the color of your skin and your hair as well."

"And your eyes!" Shouted Rilla. "They're blue!"

"Yes. My eyes are blue. Your—"

"What color are my eyes?" Asked Rilla and she got closer to Nicolle.

"Rilla? Do you not—have you never seen your own eyes?" Nicolle looked to Wacamolo who shrugged.

"I probably haven't looked at myself in a reflection in decades," he said. He smiled brightly. "Our people frown on appearances. What matters is the spirit." Wacamolo frowned, "Of course, that's a bunch of poppycock, but it is our way."

Nicolle pat Rilla on the hand and got out a small satchel she carried. "I usually use this for signaling or experiments," she said, rifling through the many instruments and ingredients. She pulled out a small mirror the size of the palm of her hand. "Here. You can look at your own eyes."

Rilla did so. She moved the mirror all around looking at all kinds of parts of her face. She looked to Able, "I don't look like you." She looked to Nicolle, "I don't look like you." She looked at Wacamolo and pondered for a moment, then wrinkled her nose, "I sort of look like you, but not really."

"Thank you," said Wacamolo and he put his hands together and bowed.

Nicolle laughed. "Yes. We all look quite different. I think it's a good thing."

"Can you make my hair like yours?"

"Only sort of. We can make it short if you like."

Rilla pulled on her hair and turned to Able. "What do you think Able."

"I don't have hair really."

"You sort of do," Rilla said, looking at the strands of filaments on Able's head. "And it's short."

Able closed his eyes and tensed his body. His hair grew a few centimeters. "I can make it long."

Nicolle's eyes grew with wonder. Rilla and Wacamolo laughed. Rilla said, "Able! I didn't know you could do that!"

"Yup."

Nicolle looked to Gef, whose head was covered by his large hat. "Gef, might we see your hair?"

"No. I don't have any."

"Can you?"

"Yeah. I just don't see the point."

Nicolle frowned, "Party pooper."