# Chapter 32

## In which the crew saves the Craft Siltmere

The Craft Siltmere had struck a rogue wave. Captain Ona Soireé could tell from the angle of their ascent that they had about fifteen ern to do anything required before the silt-glider went over the top of the wave and then there would be freefall as they cascaded down the other side. As she donned her siltsuit—one of the only people in the navigation room even able to stand upright and navigate the room—she was shouting orders to her crew. "Get yourself ties to the high knobs! We're going to freefall!"

Xistra, Nicolle and Wacamolo had all fallen and fallen to the back of the navigation room, Xistra landing on her feet. The captain had remarked before that a lot of Dustmyn had natural silt legs. She began to scurry to help Nicolle to her feet, who, exhausted, had crumpled into a pile on the wall. "I've got you, sister," she said as she began helping the weakened Nicolle put on her breathing mask and checked her suit's latches.

Gef was shouting from above them, clinging to the maps table. "Xistra! Nicolle! Help Waca and go below! Make sure Arthra and Rilla are okay!" Gef swung himself to the "top" of the maps table and looked further up the room to the Captain. The Captain shouted down to him, "There's no time for that! The storage room is stabilized anyway. Get everyone tied to that wall!"

Gef looked around and to his surprise, Ka' Rolly was right next to him. Gef smiled a quick smile and then said, "You heard the captain, let's get everyone tied in!" He and Ka'Rolly jumped from the table on either side and slid all the way to the back of the navigation room. Once there, they began grabbing ties wound around cylinders on the round wall of the navigation room and attaching the to the silt suits of the others.

Gef looked to Wacamolo, Nicolle and Xistra, who were laying against the back wall of the  navigation room, stuck to it. Wacamolo shouted, his voice muffled by both his breathing mask and the massive roar outside the room. "Where's Po?" He looked around the room and saw a small satellite near the maps table, made up of Nip cradling Po and hovering. Then, the crew found themselves sliding to the bottom of the wall and the floor of the room coming back underneath them.

Nicolle was still sitting, hunched over in a pile at the corner of the wall and floor. Gef repelled over to her, checked her tie and said, "Hey! Hey! You in there?" Nicolle could do little more than hold her hand up and give him an okay sign. He put his arm around her arm and grabbed on to her tie. The floor ceased to be the floor again, now tilting in the opposite direction. The winches of the ties began to whir and tighten as everyone lifted off of the floor and began just floating in the air, unable to maneuver themselves much.

The wave had been massive, steep and fast; so much so, it had hurled the silt-glider into the air, only to let it fly for moments before it connected again, the wave dropping the glider like a toy. Although out looked like everyone was floating, it was just that the glider was falling faster than they were. They were all falling inside the ship, which was falling. Despite the cracking sound of the wind and torrent outside, it seemed calm inside the navigation room.

* * *

Inside the antechamber of the conning tower of the glider, Huck-ta had pulled a tie from the wall and wrapped around Able and then done the same for himself. They were both floating in the small room, and Able said, "You sure can move when you want to."

Huck-ta nodded.

Able looked around the room, lit up by gloworm orbs. "This is fun!"

Huck-ta tucked himself into a ball, floated upside down facing Able, closed his eyes and sighed.

* * *

There was a massive jolt as the ship again made contact with the wave, slid to the bottom and then promptly righted itself. Everything and everyone in the navigation room came back down to the floor, only some landing on their feat. For the others, the ties had kept them close enough to the floor that fall was not bad. Gef let himself fall next to Nicolle and as they began to be able to sit upright on the floor, Nicolle pulled her mask off and gasped. "I don't know which is worse..." She gulped a deep breath again, "the silt sickness or the freefall."

"Your determination is impressive, but maybe now you want to stay with Rilla and Arthra in the stabilized cargo bay?"

Nicolle gulped and nodded, "Yes, please."

They both laughed and Gef waved over to Ka'Rolly. "Can you get her down to the cargo bay?" Ka'Rolly saluted and lifted Nicolle up gently and carried her out of the navigation room.

Wacamolo wobbled over to Gef, his hand on his head. "If you'll not be needing me, I think I will join them."

Gef put his hand on Wacamolo's shoulder. "That'll be just fine."

Po and Nip, in their satellite configuration, floated over to Wacamolo who spoke, "I'll be find you two. Stay here." They all beeped with contentment.

One of the doors to the navigation room opened and Able, followed by Huck-ta entered the room. "That was fun!" said Able. Then, his expression changed as he saw Ka'Rolly carrying Nicolle, and Wacamolo behind them, sagging. "Is everyone all right?"

The captain approached both. "Everyone is going to be all right, Able." The captain clapped Huck-ta hard on the shoulder, "Thanks once again, number one." Huck-ta nodded. She turned to Gef, "Now we have a new problem. Let's all go out on the deck and try to figure out where the hell we are heading."

Able looked up at Gef, "I want to check on Rilla."

"Be quick about it. Then get back to the deck and bring Ka'Rolly with you. I have a feeling we're going to need to check the Texo Compass after that wave."

* * *

The cargo bay was a massive metal sphere in the belly of the glider. Resting on metal beads the size of Able's head, the spacious room was entirely immune to movements of the ship as it rolled to keep it's interior "flat" when compared to the rest of the ship. As the ship tipped back and forth on the waves, the chamber would roll on the metal ball bearings always leveling itself. While the construction did a lot to protect the cargo from the undulations of the Site Sea, it did not protect against freefall. So, when Able arrived in the cargo bay with the other members of the crew, was Rilla was very excited to see him and tell him about floating in the air. She ran at Able and hugged him.

"We we floating!" She shouted.

"I know! Me too."

"Really?"

"Yes!"

"Wow. That was so strange, Able. Luckily I wasn't Able to float too far up, because I was tied to Arthra."

Xistra approached the dustmyn crew member assigned to organize and guard the cargo bay, the ship's quartermaster, Sakhra. "Merki o'mash hamoulat thameena, t'ool." She thanked him for looking after their most precious cargo. Sakura put his hands together and bowing replying that it was merely his job, no thanks were needed.

Arthra lay curled across a massive pile of wood chips along one stretch of the room's curved wall. Ka'Rolly walked towards the middle of her and lay Nicolle down in her siltsuit to rest. 

Sakhra asked Xistra, "What ails your friend?"

Xistra replied, "She is from a place that does not even know about the Silt Sea—or at least had never seen it. It seems to be poisonous to her."

Sakhra clicked his tongue. "Silt sickness. I have seen others come down with it."

Xistra approached Nicolle and helped her remove her breathing mask. Sakhra seemed shocked, "It's even discolored her hair!"

Xistra chuckled, "No, friend, this is what all her peoples look like—though she is paler than usual. Could you get me a piece of damp cloth?"

"Of course," said Sakhra and he walked off among the equipment to fetch it.

Wacamolo had arrived to stand next to Ka'Rolly, as well as Able and Rilla. "I will consult with Po and see if we can find any sort of herb or logicanth that might help her."

Nicole heard everyone speaking, and quietly said, "I'll feel better now that I'm down here. The motion has stopped." Then she moaned and rolled over on her back.

Wacamolo elbowed Xistra, "She's invincible," and smiled. Xistra smiled back. Then, Wacamolo turned and pointed to Able and Ka'Rolly and said, "You two better get back up on deck like Gef asked. I bet we're not out of trouble."

Both Rilla and Able sighed. Able turned to Rilla, "I gotta go back."

Rilla took Able's arm, "'S okay, Able. We're fine in here. Go do what you need to and then come back and then we'll ask Wacamolo to tell us a new story."

Overhearing this, Waca's heart was filled with joy.

"Okay," said Able and sighed again. "I'll be back in a little while. C'mon, Ka'Rolly."

Ka'Roly bent over to Rilla and Rolly bumped its head against the glass as if to kiss her goodbye. Rilla obliged and grabbed Ka'Rolly by its glass head and kissed it. "Bye Ka'Rolly."

* * *

Back on deck, the rogue wave had left peace in its wake. The captain, her first mate, Gef, Able, Ka'Rolly, Nip, Po and Xistra all stood near the massive first sail of the glider. It was wrinkled and shivering in the air as the wind had died down. Around them, crew members rushed about their duties, mostly trying to tighten the sails.

"This happens often after a rogue wave. It leaves doldrums in its wake—large pockets of the sea with no wind. It could take us days, if not weeks to get moving again."

"If I may," said Xistra, "I have been wondering something, and this might be just the opportunity to test it out."

"Please," said Captain Ona.

Xistra looked at Able, "The texo compass—shall we fire it again?"

Able shrugged, "Sure." At this point it had become nearly second nature to Able to set off the compass. With Po in his hands, he walked over to Ka'Rolly, who without hesitation, lifted Able up on their shoulders. Able closed his eyes and lifted Po out in the air. From out nowhere, Nip appeared and began orbiting the group, the four of them racing in faster and faster circles until Po once again began to vibrate and hum and then—voom!—the massive blue laser fire out again, bending in arc to the Northwest as it had done several times on the journey now.

The entire crew stopped what they were doing. The captain stood in shock. Even Huck-ta turned slowly from the bow of the ship to look. They had all seen the texo compass once before, just after the Siltmere had set sail, but it was a wonder nonetheless. Even Gef had to look on in wonder, having seen the construction function half a dozen times. In all his years and years of wandering, he never suspected that the texo compass would be a boy synthezoid and his made up macrobats.

Only Xistra failed to be in awe. Instead, she wore a frown and studied the laser up close, not where it was pointing. She pulled out of a satchel, a corked boiling flask filled with water. She turned it upside down and reached up to hold it just next to the laser. Within a few moments, the water had began to boil, but the glass remained cool in her hand.

Gef looked to the flask and squinted. What manner of science was this, he wondered. Xistra let the flask drop and almost as soon as she had, the water ceased boiling. "Thank you, Abe! I'm good."

Able opened his eyes as though coming out of a trance and the laser ceased. Everyone on the ship seemed to deflate a little. The crew went back to work. The Captain and Gef slumped a bit.

Xistra held the flask out to Captain Ona who just looked at it with suspicion. "I think we can power the ship's sails with the Texo Compass."

Both the Captain and Gef looked shock, "What?" The Captain asked.

"It we coat the back of the genmaker sail with the right material and fire the Texo Compass into it, it will build air pressure on one side and generate... well, it will be like we are making our own wind."

The Captain looked to Gef for reassurance, but Gef just shrugged. "Couldn't hurt to try."

"Couldn't hurt? What if it burns my sails down?"

Xistra smiled and said, "It not heat that's causing the boiling. It's pressure. The Texo Compass excites the nanosphere... I'm not totally sure how." Having deconstructed, Nip come over to sit near Xistra. She smiled and took one of Nip out of the air. "It was part of one of the experiments I conducted at Kvet while we were working against the Chimexopods."

Gef put his hand to his head. "I wondered what you all were so busy with while we were building."

"Oh, there's more," said Xistra with a sense of mystery. "Nicolle and I discovered quite a lot." She looked worried for a second.

Gef reassured her, "We'll make sure she's going to be all right."

"Yes," Xistra beamed confident again, "But I think it is safe to say that we can power the ship."
