# Chapter 38

## Into the Boloran

The crew steered up the waterway leading in to the Sund fjord with Arthra, along with two new mounts, mechadons, on one of which rode Tet and the other Nicolle. They had made their way out of Sund and the ruins of Sund Lei to the rocky origins of the fjord, a river bordered on either side by vast canyon walls. Here and there were waterfalls or small vales where the cliff sides subsided. Beyond the fjord stood the massive Boloran mountain range. The gray, sometimes blue, mountains reached skyward and hid their heads in the clouds. Several of the crew had never seen clouds—these hazy or fluffy things that looked like smoke but were still and gray.

Having sworn Able to secrecy about the Vault and Grokkon, Nicolle and Xistra had elected not to tell anyone else about what happened. From Grokkon’s reaction regarding Tet, they knew not to tell him, but Xistra had particularly suspected that Tet had ways of spying on them that they were not aware of as of yet. Xistra even went so far as to suggest that perhaps it was Tet who destroyed the vault, although Nicolle pointed out that Tet had been with Gef all day securing the new mounts and Arthra. Xistra argued, “We’ve seen him build new synthezoid bodies and a marcobot take on superpositions recently. We just don’t know what kind of science he could be using against us.” Nicolle didn’t relent, but did set the argument aside with the agreement that they would be very careful. With the new information the three had acquired, the mission hadn’t changed. They would need to reach Uchava for some means of flight to search for the Ultracircus.

They disembarked at a village called Reet but stayed for only long enough to move supplies from the skiff to the mounts. The Krunmyn of the village moved so slowly, there movements were barely perceptible. The crew moved around them like statues and assembled their caravan. Of course, there was Arthra, netted in new armor and litters where the crew could sit comfortably with covering. Tet and Gef had acquired two new mechadons as well. The three mounts, laden with crew and supplies began winding their way into the vale and North toward the Boloran.

Sitting in one of Arthra’s pods’ litters Able told Wacamolo about the tiles around the vault. Able was sitting cross-legged and hunched over, his bulk just filling half the litter. Wacamolo sat across from him, also cross-legged but with his back to the road. Rilla lay next to Wacamolo sleeping under a very soft, new blanket. Of course, to Able’s mind he had to keep the secret of what was *in* the vault but not that they had found it or how.

Wacamolo stroked his bushy beard. “And with that information you were able to open the vault?”

“We needed Nicolle’s ring, too. But I swore to Nicolle and Xistra to keep secret what we found inside.”

“Ah. A secret,” said Wacamolo.

“Nicolle and Xistra thought that maybe we couldn’t trust someone.” Able cocked his forward toward Tet on his mechadon. At the head of the caravan.

“I see,” said Wacamolo.

Able looked down. “Sorry.”

“That’s all right, Able.” Wacamolo pat his hand. “Sometimes we must keep secrets to be safe, especially in times when danger is about.” Wacamolo paused to stare out the litter window at Tet. He turned his attention back to Able. “But I assume you spoke with Grokkon?”

Able looked perplexed, then upset and he whispered, “But I didn’t say anything!”

“No, Able. No, you didn’t.” He winked.

Able disliked it when Wacamolo winked. It meant he knew something that Able didn't understand.

* * *

It just kept getting colder. Able didn’t care, his fusion heart kept his temperature perfectly regulated. In this particular instance though, seeing Wacamolo and Rilla shivering even when covered in blankets, Able concentrated and turned his temperature up until the litter was more comfortable. This seemed to awaken Rilla, who stretched long and hard and yawned  and say up, gathering in her surroundings.

“Able, since we were discussing Tet, what do you know about synthezoids?” asked Wacamolo.

“Only what Gef has told me, really.”

“And Tet?”

“He hasn’t told me much of anything.”

Rilla jumped in, “I can tell you all about synthezoids. They’re not made of skin and squishy stuff. They can see and hear and smell more than we can. They can’t drown. They’re tough but smart—“

“Thank you, Rilla. I appreciate your enthusiasm as always, but I was more driving at history. What does Able know about his people.”

Able shrugged. “Until I met Gef, I didn’t think I had a people. I thought I was alone.” Able paused and then said with a shrug, "And I guess there's Tet."

Rilla reached up and put her hand on Able’s elbow to comfort him. She knew about loneliness.

Wacamolo asked, “Evo never discussed it with you?”

“No.”

Wacamolo sighed. “Perhaps she meant to, I think. I think she was raising you a certain way. You see, Able, your people are not born the same way we organics are—one from another. Your people were born from a vast machine called the Orchard. Your existence is slightly strange because the Orchard disappeared with the Shattering as well as most of your people. Generally speaking, synthezoids are born fully grown the way they are, like Gef, and they are born knowing everything they will ever need to know.”

Able laughed, “I wish I knew everything.”

Wacamolo scratched his beard, "Do you?"

Able and Rilla knew immediately the sound of the teacher's question that was not a question at all but an introduction and they both leaned in closer to Wacamolo, anticipating what was to come, Rilla even nearly shouting, "Tell us!"

Wacamolo laughed a healthy laugh, surprised by his predictability. "Very well. There was a lady of Uchava who—"

"Is that where we're going?" Asked Rilla.

"Yes," said Wacamolo, "the floating city."

Able bragged to Rilla, "I met an aaraamyn woman in Sund!"

Wacamolo looked at Able skeptically. Able looked down and corrected himself, "Well, I saw her—a little bit."

Smiling Wacamolo said, "Well, it matters not—I promise it wasn't her. This was thousands of years ago when there were *woods*."

Sensing enchantment in the word, Able and Rilla grew quiet and began to listen again.

"The woods were like gardens today but much, much larger—much lusher—more vibrant green than anything you've seen. And much bigger than gardens. And the woods were known as a dangerous place, for it was in them that the unknown lurked."

"The aaraamyn did not dislike the woods but did prefer to fly over them, occasionally resting in the branches. To go into a wood, down into the shrubbery, was highly verboten."

"Ver-bo-tan," said Rilla.

"Yes, yes. Forbidden."

Able looked confidently at Rilla and said, "She went in anyway."

Wacamolo, again predicted, this time looked slightly annoyed. "Yes. Yes she did, Able. But do you know why?"

"Love?" Asked Able

"Adventure!" Shouted Rilla, grabbing her feet and hoisting them in the air as she rolled on to her back.

"No. She was searching for a kind of nothing—a kind of nothing that she could only find in the woods."

"What does that mean?" asked Rilla.

"She was not just any aaraamyn—she was a young lady of a large house in Uchava." Wacamolo headed off the children's questions: "A large house back then was a family of great wealth and influence." The children nodded. "She was wealthy and comfortable and healthy and had a great deal of responsibilities like learning and caring for others, and it was this last part that often made her wonder: why was she so comfortable and wealthy and healthy. She would ask her parents and teachers and they would respond that it was her place, the circumstance of her birth and the hexagon drawn between the Skybow and Zendo and Gouth."

"How come you never tell me my hexsign?" Asked Rilla.

Wacamolo put his hand on her shoulder. "These were ancient times and societies had ancient beliefs. We know now that there are things that have greater influence on the world than the things in the night sky. I never wanted to influence you to think you had to be one way or another—a matter that will become more clear if I can finish the story." He winked at her.

"O-o-okay."

"The thing was, the young lady, Fharamont, found that when she went into the woods, or at least looked down on it from above at first, she saw none of what she saw in the city. Yes, there was dirt, but it was supposed to be there and not frowned upon, not to be swept up. Yes, there was death, but there was no mourning. And more, she found that as she watched the woods, her own mind would go grow quiet like the woods themselves. She did not think about what must be done, pleasant or unpleasant, did not think about her past or her future or what she was *meant* to become. This no-thinking state drew her deeper into the woods."

"The woods grew in great layers of foliage called canopies. Gradually, canopy level by canopy level, she wound her way down into the woods, drifting down from branch to branch on her wings. And the further she went, the quieter it became. In fact, she discovered that the longer she stayed and the more quiet she became, the more the woods came alive and moved and made *more* sound. There were so many mysteries."

"As she spent more and more time in the woods and returned to Uchava, she felt more and more detached."

"Detached like me?" Asked Able.

Wacamolo looked with confusion to Able. "Able, you are in no way detached. What do you mean?"

Able looked down at his hands and said, "Um. I don't know..."

Wacamolo pat him on the knee. "I think I know what you mean and you should listen, because it is not true." Wacamolo shifted his bony rump. "She felt detached because what went on in her home and city seemed unrelated to the ways of the woods. Her life in the city felt like the buildings cutting into the sky. And, in a way, she began to bring the woods back with her to the city and she would sit for long periods thinking nothing of the past or future or should or could or must. Like the woods, she let things just... happen."

"Her parents became concerned at her reveries, which lasted longer and longer, until one day her mother approached her after she had missed many lessons with teachers. Her mother asked her what she was doing. Fharamont responded that she was being like the woods. Her mother was perplexed and pointed out that the woods were dark and random and dangerous. Fharmont said, 'But the woods know nothing.'"

"Her mother thought long and hard and responded that the woods know how to feed, knew how to grow, how to create. Fharamont relied, 'The woods know nothing. They are. They do not debate, discuss, meet and teach. Yes, they feed, grow and create, but that is because they are those things. Without words, those things do not exist."

"Fharamont's mother was distressed and told her father that they should imprison the girl to keep her from going to the woods again. The woods' darkness had poisoned her mind. But Fharamont's mother was too late. In speaking her mind, Fharamont had realized the folly of even thinking or saying these things. She left at once for the woods for the last time, leaving a note for her mother that read: 'I will always feel love you and father, but I will speak no more of it because I no longer desire meaning. I wish to better know nothing, for that is more powerful than knowing."

* * *

The caravan slowed to a halt as it approached a vale at the foot of the Boloran. It was a wide expanse with a large channel of a dried-up river at its center. At the far end of the vale, nearer the mountains were the massive ruins of a wall of some kind, broken metallic pillars and arches with decorations and frescoes. It looked to be as tall as the City of Horn in some places, but then tumbled to the ground in others. The crew assembled, all having put on more clothing. It was now quite cold.

Tet said to the assembled band, "Gef, Able, Nip, Po and I should approach and explore the wall. I have heard rumors of wild Krunmyn in this vicinity, and we should take precautions. If anyone wants to come, you are welcome, but we will be quicker with few."

Able was disappointed. Normally he would insist on flying ahead with Nip and letting Po record things, but since his change, Nip struggled to carry him. He didn't complain much about his new form—there were so many advantages—but one thing he missed was flying with Nip.

Tet looked around the group. No one seemed much interested in walking over rocks in the cold. "Very well." Tet began to gather his things.

"Actually," Able spoke up. "I'm going to stay here. Po can relay his findings to Gef if you need it."

"That's fine," replied Gef. Sensing Able's disappointment at something, Gef pat him on the shoulder and said, "You make a really powerful guardian these days anyway. Think on that."

This made Able smile. Then, with waves and goodbyes, the crew watched Gef and Tet jump from rock to rock up the vale's former river. Nip and Po chirped and flew off toward the wall. The rest of the crew began busying themselves with making a lunch, except for Wacamolo who went and stood near each Mechadon and placed his hand on its forward and stood for a long time with his eyes closed. Nicolle watched with curiosity while she built a fire. Wacamolo continued to do this with much of the other equipment around the encampment. When they say down to eat a nice meal of soup and tea and dried fruit, Nicolle asked, "What are you up to, old man?"

Wacamolo sat up and looked at Nicolle and Xistra with one eye as if mentally guilting them. Able and Rilla and Ka'Rolly were off amongst the brown fields off the side from the dried riverbed playing at some game. "Like you, I am worried about spying."

Nicolle and Xistra exchanged glances. "By whom?" asked Nicolle.

"By Tet, of course. But, I have detected nothing here in this camp that I believe can listen to us right now. I will tell you what I know. You should tell me what you know. And then, we should discuss alternate plans."