### Chapter 39

# Escape from the Boloran

## In which Nicolle and the companions reveal a new form of travel.

The ancient wall served as no impediment now. Where it spanned the old riverbed, it had collapsed. They could continue following it into the reaches of the mountains, and judging from Po and Nip's survey, this was the simplest pass through the mountains to a large expanse of plains on the other side. Past that, Tet told them, they would find massive cliffs and tied to those cliffs, the floating city of Uchava.

The going was extremely rough and the crew began to experience snow on the third day. They would struggle to find level places to camp in the pass and camp against a wall of stone only to wake up in the mornings having to dig and melt there way out of piled snow. The Boloran mountains were like greedy merchants of the stuff, keeping the air too cold to allow the snow to melt, but merely exchanging it from peak to peak with powerful winds. The snow flew more sideways than down.

Here and there, oddly-shaped stones would roll down the sides of the pass or down the pass itself, some of them quite large. All of them shaped like puzzle pieces. It felt like a test. Able did his best to catch and throw them if they approached any of the caravan mounts. It was little use. The stones kept coming and growing in number. Here and there, the polygonal stones would sink together and form barriers and towers. And then came the groans. From off in the white flurry, low rumbling sounds of groaning came.

At the head of the group, Gef and Nicolle stared into the sideways snow. Nicolle was covered in as much clothing as she could find and her head was wrapped multiple time with a massive scarf, her eyes protected by goggles. "What was that?" she shouted at Gef.

Able, ahead of them, lunged to catch a large boulder and then turned and hurled over the group behind them. "Able!" shouted Gef, "just set them aside somewhere safe. You need to conserve your energy." He turned to Nicolle, "I don't know and I don't want to know. We need to find a safe spot of the main path here."

Nicolle shouted, "Could it be like the guardians in the Cullen mountains—some aaraamyn tech protecting the passage?"

"Could be. It's just that Aaraamyn tend to use the air as their defense. There!" Gef pointed to a small chasm off the path to the left. "Able, we need to take a break in there. Stay ahead of it and catch stones and pile them in wall like this," Gef gestured with arm to show a wall coming away from the chasm to catch or push off more stones falling down the pass.

Inside the small chasm, the crew was protected from the falling rocks, but now the groaning from above bounced off the walls. Like whale calls, a long low groan would sound out and then stutter at the end. The crew could tell that this wasn't one thing making the sound, but multiples of things communicating.

Tet presented an image from Po to the group. "Matters are much worse than we suspected." Po showed the group a map of the pass leading up between the peaks of the mountains but at the very tops of the mountains was something even stranger, another massive wall, this one ten times the size of the one at the base. All along the bottom of the wall were massive mechanicals that were chiseling out pieces of the mountains and stacking them on the peaks, creating a new wall, even those most of the pieces they chiseled and placed simply rolled down the mountains and many of them into the pass. "Errant mechanicals," said Tet.

No one asked what he meant. Everyone was to tired and cold. They knew what he meant anyway.

"We should turn back. This is impossible. We'll have to find another way."

Nicolle stood up. "Wait. There is another way. We don't have to turn back."

Xistra and Wacamolo stared at Nicolle intently. She waved them off. "This is life or death."

She held her hand up and said, "Nip, to me."

Nip flew to her hand and she held it close and whispered, "I need you to do what you did in the chamber, multiply. Multiply as many copies Arthra has feet and then sit by her feet—can you do that?"

Nip seemed to breathe and made a long low murmuring sound before launching out of Nicolle's hand, quivering in the air until it became a blur and then, a hundred copies of Nip burst forth filling the air with charge and each semi-transparent copy of Nip settled down at Arthra's feet. Nicolle turned to Gef, whose mouth was open with shock. "Tell Arthra to get on. As she walks, the Nips will come under her feet. We can climb out!" Nicolle beamed.

Gef smiled but said, "You could have brought this to our attention earlier."

Able lifted Rilla, barely a ball of cloth at this point, and shouted, "We can fly!" Rilla let out a muffled "ay".

In very little time at all, the crew had assembled everything and everyone on Arthra's back. Tet had released the mechadons from their harnesses and lead them back to the entrance to the chasm. To the group, as he climbed aboard Arthra, he said, "They'll find their way back to Reet. Some Krunmyn there will have a very good and rich day." He rolled his eyes.

Gef stood in front of Arthra, his forehead pressed against hers. "Are you ready for this. You're going to fly?"

Arthra shivered, but then step, one hundred legs at a time, on to the awaiting Nips. She took one step forward and as she did one Nip from the backend vanished and appeared right where she was about to step. She began to step slightly faster as Gef was the last to jump aboard. She began to double-back into the chasm circling around as the Nips lifted her up and invisible spiral staircase. It did't take her long before she was moving at a normal pace, climbing up out of the chasm and then the pass and then, even above the sleet where the crew could see now, the tops of the Boloran covered in a swarm of machines that were chiseling rock and piling it, the wall of rocks at the peak reaching even higher into the dome of dark gray clouds that surrounded everything.

Gef laughed and pointed "To Uchava, Arhtra! Woo!"

Most of the crew had huddled around Able for warmth in the first litter. The second litter was now filled with supplies and equipment from the mechadons. In the third sat the strange pairing of Wacamolo and Tet. Tet has hoped to occupy it by himself, but as Arhtra began her ascent, he found Wacamolo entering with him.

They sat and stared at one another. "Quite a trick," said Tet.

"That it was," replied Wacamolo.

"Certainly a trick that would have helped sooner."

"Yes."

"I wonder why anyone would keep that a secret?"

They sat in silence, each looking out their respective window to watch the errant mechanicals built their never-ending and useless wall.

Finally, Tet turned to Wacamolo. "I am aware of the distrust of the group, but *strategically speaking*, it does no good to keep secrets from me."

"*Strategically speaking*," said Wacamolo, "I love these people and more people than that." Wacamolo leaned forward, "And I know the secrets that *you* keep." He winked.

Tet sniffed in condescension and the two continued to look out their windows.