# Chapter 38

## Into the Boloran

The crew with Arthra along with two new mounts, mechadons, one one of which road Tet and the other Nicolle, had made their way out of Sund and the ruins of Sund Lei to the rocky origins of the fjord. Beyond the Ford stood the massive Boloran mountain range. The gray, sometime blue, mountains reached skyward and hid their heads in the clouds, hazy or fluffy things that looked smoke but were still and white. Several of the crew had never seen clouds.

Having sworn Able to secrecy about the Vault and Grokkon, Nicolle and Xistra had alas elected not to tell anyone else about what happened. From Grokkon’s reaction regarding Tet, they knew not to tell him, but Xistra had particularly suspected that Tet had ways of spying on them that they were not aware of as of yet. Xistra even went so far as to suggest that perhaps it was Tet who destroyed the vault, although Nicolle pointed out that Tet had been with Gef all day securing the new mounts and Arthra. Xistra argued, “We’ve seen him build new synthezoid bodies and a marcobot take on superpositions recently. We just don’t know what kind of science he could be using against us.” Nicolle didn’t relent, but did set the argument aside with the agreement that they would be very careful. With the new information the three had acquired, the mission hadn’t changed. They would need to reach Uchava for some means of flight to search for the Ultracircus.

Sitting in one of Athena’s pod’s litters—another nice addition acquired in Sung—Able told Wacamolo about the tiles around the vault. Rilla lay next to him sleeping under a very soft, new blanket. Of course, to Able’s mind he had to keep the secret of what was *in* the vault but not that they had found it or how.

Wacamolo stroked his bushy beard. “And with that information you were able to open the vault?”

“We needed Nicolle’s ring, too. But I swore to Nicolle and Xistra to keep secret what we found inside.”

“Ah. A secret,” said Wacamolo.

“Nicolle and Xistra thought that maybe we couldn’t trust someone.” Able cocked his head to one side toward Tet on his mechadon.

“I see,” said Wacamolo.

Able looked down. “Sorry.”

“That’s all right, Able.” Wacamolo pat his hand. “Sometimes we must keep secrets to be safe, especially in times when danger is about.” Wacamolo paused to stare out the litter window at Tet. He turned his attention back to Able. “But I assume you spoke with Grokkon?”

Able looked perplexed, then upset and he whispered, “But I didn’t say anything!”

“No, Able. No, you didn’t.”

