### Chapter 40

# Arrival at Uchava

## In which the crew are allowed into the city and prepare to meet the Fairex.

Arthra's arrival on her brightly lit emerald conveyor belt road in the night sky did not go unnoticed. The crew could see from their vantage point, the city on the horizon in the night sky. It was an arch of thousands of lights, the dirigibles holding it aloft outlined with sparkling lights as well. It was a silhouette in the night except where there were piers and landing platforms. Before long, the crew could see large four-winged, cybernetic  creatures flying on either side of them, matching their speed. Arthra did not appear to mind, seemed to consider it a race until Ged urged to slow down. The creatures, gliding on the air, could not slow to such a speed and were forced ahead.

Still they swooped away from one another and circled back around to come up alongside Arthra again, this time firing metal anchors at her in an attempt to drag her out of the sky. The anchors and grappling hooks bounced loudly off of Arthra's armor and fearing that they might and a hit between her chitin, Gef shouted down to Nip, "Nip! We need to be on the ground! Now!"

Nip dutifully began to spiral itself into a staircase downward.  Again, the flying combatants could not match Arhtra's path and flew off into the darkness. Arthra came to the ground level, and as she did, rather than create the next step in front of one of her feet, Nip began to coalesce again until there were just two of it. These two spiraled up into the air in a fury of green light, dancing with itself in the joy of what it had just accomplished.

The crew began to disperse from the formerly-flying centipede and assembled in a large grassy field, the blades up to their waists. It was an unusual site for all of theme bit unsettling, but at least it was warmer. They lit up orbs and gathered in front of Arthra. "I don't know what that was, but I bet they'll be back," said Gef. "If Arthra can fly now, why are we going to Uchava? Let's just move on. They'll be back here any minute."

"Those are the guardians of Uchava," said Tet. "And yes, they will be here sooner then we can leave—"

Even as Tet was speaking, gusts of wind pressed the high grass to the ground and blew their clothes and hair in every direction, coming from no one clear source. As the wind settled, Tet said, "We still should seek to speak to their leaders. We may not need an airship now, but there may be other assistance they can provide. We should just tell them our plans."

"Yes," joined Wacamolo, "honesty is always the best policy when considering plans." He did not look at Tet.

Gef said to Tet and Able, "We stay back. Let's get some disguises. We have no idea what out presence will do."

Tet confided, "I *do* have some idea, and disguises are a good one."

As Able and Tet and Gef scuttled back into one of Arthra's litters, from out of the dark, lights appeared, followed by twelve aaraamyn forms. Unlike the aaraamyn woman in Sund, these aaraamyn were large and covered in steel and cloth flight suits. "Trespassers! What are you doing here? State you business."

Xistra stepped forward, Nicolle at her side holding a large lantern, "We bring gifts for the houses of Uchava."

What appeared to be the leader of the group of aaraamyn replied, "Gifts? In the middle of the night? On some flying machine we've never seen before? How do we know you aren't scouts?"

Nicolle said, "We barely escaped the monsters at the top of the Boloran. Surely, you know about them."

The leader eyed the bolt of cloth that Xistra held out. "Is this your entire party?"

Xistra look back to Arthra and the litters. "We have three other travelers, Hazirabi, like myself. We are fleeing an invasion of Chimexapods."

The captain of the Aaraamyn looked to a companion in acknowledgment and then back to Xistra, "You also? We've managed to stave them off at our Eastern border, but we don't know for how long." He shifted his wait and removed his helmet, revealing a large plume of feathers. "We will take you to see the Fairex, our council of high families. Perhaps Unubyss sees fit to allow is to work together." On of there other guards stepped forward and put a wing to the captain's ear and whispered. The captain smiled. "We would also love a demonstration of your... flying... centipede?"

Xistra smiled. "Of course."

* * *

The Fairex was the grand template at the center of the city. By tradition, all floating docks of the city had to tie their lines to the Fairex. The crew came to find out from the guards that even though the city sections appeared to be held aloft by the brightly colored cloth dirigibles, they were in fact just a cultural tradition. Beneath most docks, except for sheds and cabins, there were machines humming away that created an anti-gravitational effect; although, the captain told them, maintaining that effect had become more and more difficult since the Shattering, and the dirigibles did play a role in emergencies, stoping city sections from just plummeting to the ground. The guard pointed to a few of the balloons and said that there were a surprising number of new zeppelins in only the last few years. Gravity just wasn't what it used to be.

Because of all of the lines, thick and thin, tying to the Fairex, whatever ground routes there were for bipeds, it was covered in cords and ropes. The crew had to be careful were they stepped or sprain an ankle. Still, despite the messiness of the place, the city was more intact than any other place any of the crew had visited. The buildings were made of a very light wood called Gimban. It was a large hollow reed that could be pulped and pressed into shapes and then shined to the point of looking nearly metallic. Because of its weight, pressed Gimban was fairly easily kept aloft.

Able, cloaked and masked, with Rilla on his shoulder approached one of the guards. Rilla asked, "When do aaraamyn learn to fly?" The guard looked up at Rilla, practically ignoring Able, "At about your age, actually." Rilla put her chin out proudly, "Actually, I flew here."

The guard smiled, "I would say your centipede mount did a lot of the work." The guard leaned in conspiratorially, "How does that work?"

Rilla began to speak just as Wacamolo pressed himself between the guard and Able, speaking loudly, "Aren't children's imaginations wonderful!" The guard took the message and moved back with his comrades. "Rilla? A word please? I need to explain to you what 'under cover' means."

Because of the time of night, the crew was boarded in a small building near the temple. They were under curfew, and guards would be posted, but the Captain assured them that this was as much for their safety as the city's. They would be summoned in the morning.

The crew gathered in the main room of their temporary abode. The ceiling in the room was twice as high as that of any other dwelling they'd been in, and it was filled with rings and bars. All of the windows were high up and with perches. 

"Well," Tet began after every one had made makeshift sitting and sleeping arrangements, Rilla being the first to begin softly snoring. "We needn't acquire a flying ship anymore."

"What is our goal here? Should we just leave?" joined Gef.

Nicolle spoke, "We should at least find out what happened to their chief scientist. Does it match any pattern to what we know happened to the others?"

"Erra is as likely dead as the rest of them," Tet said, not at all aware of how much what he said stung Nicolle and Xistra. He didn't look up from the floor.

Nicolle shot back, "Well, having *one* scientist with us would be worth more than having you so far."

Tet looked hurt and confused.

Gef held up his hands, "All right, all right. Let's stick to the question, do we stay or do we go. We have the texo compass, we can find the Ultracircus. Able, don't you think you could project the beam from Arthra's back and we just have her follow it?"

Able's eyes grew wide. "Wow. That would be neat."

"So?" Gef asked the crew.

Xistra spoke from the corner of the room, barely visible, "I'm not hanging around here. I don't like prisons, no matter how polite they are."

Gef turned to Xistra now, "Just please—please don't go off half-cocked. We're not in any trouble—"

"Yet," said Wacamolo. "They don't even know who the three of you really are," he continued, pointing to Tet, Gef and Able. "We were lucky when the Hazirabi were glad to see you, Gef. That may note be true here."

Tet spoke, "That may be a reason to stay and later reveal ourselves. Regardless if we can get to the Ultracircus, we have no intelligence on its condition or if anyone occupies it. We could be walking into fight. Second, we could help them repair their repulsers. If there were a council scientist here, Erra or whomever, she or he would have made the repulsers adaptive to the gravitational fluxes already. They're highly lucky that a well hasn't yet formed anywhere near here."

Nicolle said, "We don't have to tell them who we are in order to offer to fix their repulsers. We tell them we're honored to be here and as part of letting us stay for at time, we'll fix them. Maybe after that we can tell them the truth. Does that satisfy your ethics, Waca?"

Wacamolo laughed, "Ethics. Fancy word. I believe we occupy a much gray-er world. But, for once, Tet and I agree. We may know where the Ultracircus is but we do not know the situation 'on the ground' there. We should remain, offer to help, and gather information. We should find out what happened to Erra. And furthermore, since the matter is on her mind, I nominate Xistra as our spymaster."

Gef looked at Able, "What do we do about him?"

Tet responded, "I don't think anyone would recognize his design as synthezoid—it's completely novel. But... it doesn't matter." Everyone looked on for an explanation. Tet walked over to Able and said, "I want you to concentrate very hard on your old body. I want you to remember what the world looked like from that perspective. I want you to focus on your size and what it was like to hold things that way—the size of your hands and fingertips. Focus."

Able closed his eyes and imagined playing on the floor with Nip and Po and Ka when they were still just spheres. He dreamt of how they felt in his hands. As everyone watched, Able's entire body began to shift and turn, parts spun and folded into one another. His arms and legs began to shorten while his head and hands remained comically large, but as Able continued to concentrate, those changed too, until after several minutes of jaws agape in the room, Able appeared to be his old child-like self again. Rilla was the first to react and cheered and ran over to Able and hugged him. Able marveled at his hands while she did.

"What was that?" asked Gef.

"In my studies I came to find out that Able possesses... well... it's a central quodecube, similar to what Gef and I have. But it has... different elements than ours. I can't yet explain it, but I was able to tap this body into it more reactively similar to how Able can form the Texo Compass. Truthfully, Able, if you can think of a form and concentrate, you can become that thing."

"Wow!" said Able.

Everyone else in the room had varying reactions. Wacamolo nodded, stroking his beard. Nicolle was still staring. Xistra was smiling brightly. Ka'rolly walked over to join Rilla and Able and pat Able on the head and did cartwheels in his head.

"Wait until Nip sees," said Able, "and I'll be able to fly again!"

"Now, Able, you are much more dense than you used to be—do you know what that means?" Tet inquired.

"Dense. Yeah. I... uh... I'm, bigger on the inside."

Tet, in a rare moment, smiled. "In a manner of speaking, yes. But the main thing to realize is that you are *heavier*. Get used to that. There are other factors, but all in good time." Tet turned to the rest of the group, "So then, who is going to the Fairex and who is going spying?—we need to find out if we can trust the aaraamyn before they decide they can't trust us."