### Chapter 41

# The Fairex Secrets

## In which the crew discovers that niether the Aaraamyn or a close confidant are what they seem.

"That is ancient knowledge, nomex. How did you come by it?" Asked the aaraamyn noble from a central one of nine chairs. Representatives from each house of the Fairex were present, which was rare. Gathering a quorum was normally difficult, but all wanted to see these outsiders who road in on a centipede that walked on a glowing conveyor belt. The noble was responding to Nicolle who was holding Po out who was projecting a light sculpture of a repulser lift blueprint. Behind her, Tet and Gef stood silent in their disguises. A surprise to the group was that Arthra was there. Stripped of her bridles, ropes, litters and other equipment, she sat curled up behind the crew, resting her head on her torso.

There was plenty of room in the chamber for Arthra. The Fairex temple itself was a massive chamber with an open roof and hundreds of branches on the walls, at this moment, covered in aaraamyn. The vast hole in the roof was filled with ropes and the colors of the dirigibles holding the Fairex aloft. The chamber looked grown more than built. All of the heads of the noble families perched on large, ornate branches growing in a semi-circle on one side of the chamber, opposite the large circular entrance that mirrored the one in the roof. Each noble wore a hat representing the different families with massive displays of different colors of plumage.

A different noble spoke, this one having the appearance of a teenager. The other nobles seemed annoyed at the boy speaking. "We do need help with the repulsers, but why would you help us?"

"I hail from Boisenval. Do you know it?"

The boy noble shook his head.

"We were under assault in our land by many things—pollution, strange creatures and a renegade scientist. My compatriots' land was under assault by chimexopods. In fact, we understand that you might face a similar fate. We mean to help you in exchange for information."

"Ask. Perhaps we do *not* need your help," said a noble woman sitting next to the teenager and looking menacingly more at him than anyone else. The boy shrank down in his chair, not sure how he had broken decorum.

"We are seeking information about this." With nary a hint, Po changed the light sculpture of the repulser into the Ultracircus and increased the projection to fill the bottom of the chamber. Aaraamyn on the lower branches could almost reach out and touch it and there was an audible gasp throughout the chamber.

Several of the council members began speaking at once. One shouting "Blasphemy!" Another, "Hope at last!" There was a great deal of arguing until one of the larger and older nobles stood and raised his wings. Gradually the chamber quieted and Po took the cue to shrink the light sculpture down by half. The older nobleman spoke, "This is strange indeed, my flight! But we know that strange days are upon us. This machine is called the Loathtraxx by us, but to many it is the Ultracircus." The nobleman turned to Nicolle, "Yes?"

"Yes. We call it the Ultracircus and we believe there is information there that can help us to... stabilize the Archelux."

Again, there was much conferring on the council and noise in the chamber. Again the elder spoke raised his wings for silence. "I believe we will refuse your help with our technology—" he turned and tamped the noise of the council itself, "—once we have *voted* on the matter." The council calmed down after this last admission. "However, I believe I can predict how the council will vote, because we have maintained the flight of Uchava for a generation and do need  outsiders interfering. Further, I will tell you this for free: flying cybernetic centipede or not, you have no chance of ever reaching the Ultracircus, even if it survives, which we doubt. We know it to be in the heart of the Mystal Storm belt and nothing survives a journey even near the storm. One cannot even fly around the storm because it goes to the pole of the Archelux and because of the chimexapod swarms south of it in the region north of the Silt Sea."

Tet stepped forward, disguising his voice and whisper-loud like the Hazarabi he said, "We beg your pardon, noble pilot," Tet bowed and then looked up again, "but we have survived the Scar of Delphine, the Automatic Jungle, the Eye of Sa'ah. We even survived the errant automata on the peaks of the Boloran!" There was a great deal of murmuring in the chamber at this last statement. "We understand the challenge before us better than most."

* * *

Xistra and the kids, Nip and Ka'Rolly had found their way into the lower levels of the dock beneath their "inn". The guards were certain that no land-dwelling creatures could escape the dock lacking flight without their centipede. The "exploratory committee" were gathered around a trop door that looked thousands of meters down to sharp rocks. This was the third trap door, the previous two having lead to ladders. Xistra sighed, "We're not going any further in this direction." She looked to the others. "We're not finding out anything unless we can get off this dock."

"Why don't we ask Nip to make a path for us to walk on—like it did for Arthra?"

"Walk in the air?" Asked Xistra. "No. We need a different plan."

"Are you scared?" asked Rilla.

"I'm not scared. It's just too dangerous—for you two. It's too dangerous for kids."

Rilla folded here arms, "I'm not scared."

Xistra looked around, "We just need to find another way to cross."

"Nah," said Able, "you don't even need to walk when you're our size and not Arthra's." Able reached out and grabbed Nip, "C'mon Nip!" And he jumped out the trap door.

Xistra hissed in a way and volume that did scare Rilla, "Able!"

Once through the trap door, Able and Nip slowed to a hover. Nip released a harness and Able sat down comfortably, so glad to be back to his old size. The pair hovered back up through the trap door. "See? You don't even have to hang on."

Xistra put her hand to her face, "Able," and shook her head.

Without hesitating, Able said, "I'll go find another door and then send Nip back for each of you," and the pair dropped out the trap door again.

Rilla reached up to pat Xistra on the shoulder. "We'll be fine, Xistra."

Xistra looked the child as if to be sick.

Rolly, inside Ka, swam in excited circles.

When Nip returned without Able, it squeaked and then shivered and then burst into three more copies. It seemed to be getting easier for the little macrobot to split itself into entangled copies. Both Rilla and Ka'Rolly enthusiastically jumped in the different Nips' harnesses. Xistra looked to be on the verge of tears, but she breathed deep, grasped the straps on one of the Nips, and shut her eyes tight.

The view from underneath the docks was curious. Hundreds of different docks all undulated in the air, some more than others, all different sizes. The larger ones had the repulsers that Nicolle told them to looks for, sticking out of their bottoms like metallic flowers. Many of them sputtered and were covered in static electricity, clearly in disrepair. Rilla looked all about, but mostly at her feet as they dangled over a thousand meter drop. Now, from this vantage point she could see the massive cliffs that the city docks were all anchored to. "Wow," she whispered to no one. Xistra, meanwhile, let her knuckles go white from squeezing the straps on her harness and kept her eyes shut. In about ten minutes, the Nip copies brought the three up through a new trap door to greet Able.

"Ta da!" shouted Able.

Xistra would have shushed him, but all she could do was crumple to the floor. "Oh dear silt," she whispered in to the wooden floor.

* * *

They wandered down long hallways with many doors leading to what were once abodes, filled with broken furniture, windows boarded up, with all manner of scribbling in charcoal and paint that covered pealing, chipped paint that was once bright and cheerful. They passed through a large darkened chamber filled with long tables, but all of the chairs were missing or broken. What were once murals on the walls were now faded and gray, once depictions of aaraamyn reaching great heights in a sky filled with clouds, doing battle with all manner of flying, feathered four-legged creatures and balloon-like squid creatures with giant platters of eyes, none of which anyone in the group had never seen before.

With more wandering and one more Nip jump—to Xistra's absolute consternation—the information committee came to a large, cavernous room where the top portion (the much larger portion) of the repulser engines were located. The engines themselves stood like towers in the cast chamber that pierced the floor and the ceiling. They spun with a blue light and hummed at a level that could be felt in the chest. The air seemed at once filled with sound and yet quiet.

Where the group had come to was the end of a catwalk very high up and gave them an excellent view of the goings-on below. There were hundreds of aaraamyn doing all manner of work around the repulser engines, but none of it appeared to be repairs. Some of the aaraamyn were flying and pulling, in a clear struggle, against chains attached to mechanisms. Some had even collapsed to the ground and were being attended to by other aaraamyn in strange suits, injecting them with substances.

Xistra whispered to the group, "Everyone lie down on the ground."

The kids and even Nip did as they were told because of Xistra's urgency, but they looked to her to ask why.

"Able, look to the platform opposite of ours and one over, who is that?"

Able focused for a moment, and then said, "It's Tet."

Xistra wondered aloud, "What's he doing here?"

Rilla whispered, "I can't see."

Able said, "He left with Gef and Nicolle to go to the Fairex."

Xistra asked, "You're sure that's him?"

"He's got..." Able tried to remember one of Wacamolo's words, "a signature?"

"All right," said Xistra, "I've seen enough. We need to get back and confer with the others."