# Chapter 42

## Flight to the Ultracircus

As Arthra scuttled through the dusk sky on top of the copies of Nip, a bright orange glow lit up her underside. The light’s only competition was the smaller moon Zendo which was full and bright blue, as well as the Skybow South, a mere semicircle on the horizon because of how far north they were now. Only Gef and Wacamolo sat in the saddle, the rest of the crew sleeping in the litters behind them. Gef remarked, “I haven’t seen Zendo so bright for a long time—not since heading into the South.”

Wacamolo sighed. “I fear it is an omen.”

“Good? Bad? Wasn’t Zendo at one time the goddess of fortune?”

“Fortune and *oath* and it is time I broke my oath to you.”

“Oath? I don’t recall any oath you ever made to me.”

“Of course you don’t. *That’s* the oath. I swore to never tell you who you really are.”

Gef gave Waca a sideways glance. “Does this have anything to do with the name Janiso?”

Waca sighed again. “It’s all going to some to light. I checked the Quode board and for the Shattering to cease it all must come to light.”

“C’mon, Waca. Out with it.”

“I found you nowhere near Kinton Station. I brought you back to the Ultracircus. You were in terrible disrepair. I fixed you and brought you back online, but when you discovered what Enki Set’s experiment had done, you wanted to be terminated.”

“Enki Set?” Gef could not recall the name but for some reason the mere sound made him upset.

“Brother Fissionguage. He was your companion scientist. You and Tet assisted him for more than 300 years and helped build some of the greatest energy inventions ever conceived. Frankly, Enki took more of the credit than I think he deserved because you never cared about accolades. When your brothers and sisters took off into space during the exodus you saw value in staying hand helping the people off this world.” Wacamolo took a long look at Zendo. “You had such potential to fix the Shattering that I convinced you, begged you to erase your memory instead of having me shut you down and I vowed to never tell you the truth.”

Gef stared at the horizon, his mind awash in a molten tar of disbelief.

Knowing that Gef has a thousand questions, Wacamolo continued. “The cyclopedia—the information you so desperately seek—is a the Ultracircus. But what it truly is is your memory.”

Gef’s mouth was agape and he suddenly cried out, almost laughing, but angry as well, “How do you expect me to believe that some kooky old wizard from the Badlands repaired me or knew where the Ultracricus was or any of that—a hundred or more years ago, by the way.”

“Because I only became this person to protect you. It is not who I am.”

With that, Wacamolo began to shimmer. He grew in size and stature. His dreadlocks disappeared along with his wrinkles and aged skin. His eyes turned to violet. His ragged robes turned into the brilliant blue and gold uniform of a scientist. “My name is Janiso Malla, Brother Poixfacet, member oof the Sixth Council.”