Chapter 42

# More Secrets

## In which the crew discovers that niether the Aaraamyn or a close confidant are what they seem.

United once again, the group did confer, with the exception of the fact that Xistra had told the children to say nothing of seeing Tet. They were to wait and see what he said. With everyone back in the main antechamber of the inn, they exchanged information. Nicolle explained to the group that there help was not wanted, that the Ultracircus was likely in some storm that they could not traverse.

Then Xistra spoke, "They don't want our help because they don't want us to see what they're doing."

"And what is that?" Asked Tet.

"I can't be sure, but I know slavery when I see it."

The accusation quieted everyone in the room. Everyone knew what the chimexapods had done to the hazarabi, the horrors they  had visited on Xistra's people.

"If they take a vote and decided not to accept our help, then we have lost our bargaining power," said Wacamolo. "We should not tarry. We should leave before our fate is wound into theirs in ways we do not want."

"But the..." Able hesitated at the word, "the slaves? We can't leave them."

"If there is any chance of stabilizing the Archelux, Able," said Gef, "then we should leave alone. The Aaraamyn have created this situation; they will have to repair it."

"But we helped Xistra's people."

Xistra spoke with frustration, "We were not doing it to *ourselves*."

Able looked down, "It's not right."

Gef put his hand on Able's shoulder, "It's *not* right."

"The arm of justice is long, Able. Perhaps if we stabilize the Archelux, it will cause many changes—maybe it will cease the need for what the aaraamyn are doing."

Changing the subject, Tet said, "This Mystal storm belt... I know little about it. Does anyone know more?"

Xistra said, "No. What is it?"

"It seems to be a permanent weather development, somewhat like the Eye of Sa'ah, but larger. One of the council members said that not covered the top of the Archelux."

"So, you were at the Fairex this morning?"

"Of course," said Tet. He paused, "Where else would I be."

Able squinted at Tet and couldn't help himself. "You're not Tet."

Tet took a step back. "What? Of course I am."

Able shook his head. "No. You're not."

Several members of the crew turned to face Tet. "What's he talking about, Tet?" Asked Gef.

Tet looked from person to person and said, "Damn it." He shimmered brightly and then vanished, leaving behind a pair of floating octahedrons connected with rods that flew straight up and out a window.

"What in the name of Gouth!?" shouted Nicolle.

"Damn it is right. Able, how long had this not been Tet with us?"

Able scratched his head. "I'm not sure. I wasn't looking on the right frequency until Xistra told me to."

Gef sighed. "Neither was I."

"There's more," said Nicolle.

"And there's no more time," said Wacamolo. "We need to get to Arthra *now*."

The crew in unison began gathering all their things, even the children who seemed to have little idea of what was happening. Gef gave orders. "Xistra, please scout ahead of us; we'll be right behind. Able, take Nip and find the dock where they're keeping Arthra. Ka'Rolly, carry Rilla. Able, may I have Po?" Able handed Po over. "And Wacamolo?"

Wacamolo spun his staff and took a fighting stance. "I can fight or follow. You choose."

Gef smiled at his old friend. "Let's hope we can just rush the guards at the front of the building and make a break for the other docks." He held Po up, "Po, if we run into trouble while we make our way, I'm going to need a big light show from you." Po whirred in compliance. Gef turned to everyone else, "When we run out the front doors, we head to the outer docks on the east side," he pointed in the general direction. "Able, you've got to circle back toward us and make sure we're heading the right direction."

Everyone stood and looked stern, except for Xistra who had vanished minutes ago. Able grabbed on to Nip and the pair flew out the same window as Tet's Vim. The crew pushed through the door carefully and then made their way to the front doors of the building. When they got to the ornate circular double doors, Gef put his weight against the left and Ka'Rolly the right. With a nod, they both shoved the doors open full force, catching both guards with the force of their pushing and shoving them to the ground. As the crew began to run, they could hear the shouts of surprise and dismay from the guards. "Keep going! Don't stop!" shouted Gef, holding Po out in front of him like a lantern.

The crew climbed over thick cables and ducked under walkways, made their way through spiderweb masses of ropes, bolted across bridges from dock to dock, sometimes having to double-back as they found no passage from one dock to another. Usually, when they came to one of the drop-offs, Xistra would appear behind them and wave them down a different path. The aaraamyn were flying all about sounding out calls, but there were none on the ground. They appeared completely off guard by the escape. After fifteen minutes of this, Able flew down  hovering front of of them, and shouted, "Arthra's that way; maybe five docks over."

By the time they made it to the dock where Able had directed them, they were overlooking a landing area and saw Arthra there but surrounded by aaraamyn throwing chains over her in an attempt to stop them from leaving. Everyone surveyed the situation. Gef held up Po, "Little buddy, we need a big, frightening, distraction." Po chirped wildly. Gef turned and handed Po over to Able, "Show 'em what we got." Able beamed and he and Nip flew out over the landing platform.

Within moments, the landing platform was bookended by two giant creatures from the murals in the mess halls. They were feathered, four-legged, with wings on their backs, their faces covered with wide maws filled with rows of sharp teeth. The guards had seen enough and all took flight. Even Arthra laid down flat on the ground, unsure what to do, but Able flew down next to her and said, "Don't worry girl. It's just Po." Arthra chattered with glee.

He spotted the saddle, litters and the other equipment all piled by a wall at the side of the platform. As the crew were making their way down winding stairs, Able had a thought. He had a big thought. He shut his eyes and gripped his fists. As the crew was running down the stairs, they watched as Able slowly unfurled and grew to the larger version of himself.

And then he kept growing. He grew to the point of being as tall as Arthra was long. The aaraamyn were flying in circles around the platform absolutely keeping their distance from a centipede, two mythical bird beasts, and now a metallic giant. Able reach over and with ease, with a pinch really, he picked up the saddle and turned and set it one Arthra, as he did  for each of the litter and the rest of the equipment. As he was operating like a crane, and having so much fun, the rest of the crew arrived at Arthra's side and began strapping down everything. Loaded up, Rilla shouted at Able, "Able! What in the archelux have you done?"

Able squatted over her like a building and spoke with a booming voice, "Wanna a ride?"

"No. Stop fooling around and shrink back down. We have to go."

Able stood and did as she asked, parts folding into parts into sockets into liquid reserves of electrol. It took a few minutes and then he was standing next to Arthra looking up at where Rilla stood. He started climbing a rope ladder up to her and said, "Maybe one of these days I can figure out how to become a flying thing!"

Nip, hovering by him, made a sequence of squeaks in protest.

"Well, fine," said Able. "It's up to you to fly us right now. You and Arthra."

Gef surveyed the situation and laughed when he saw Xistra and Nicolle and Wacamolo all high on adrenaline from the run and absolutely stunned but what had transpired over only the last fifteen minutes. With that, the mythical beats vanished, Gef look to make sure everyone was secure and then gave the signal and a shout. "Ride!"

Arthra began running at full speed to the edge of the dock and without hesitation ran right off of it where suddenly a myriad of Nips appeared to support her every foot as she literally ran into the sky.

* * *

Tet stood with several aaraamyn nobles on the edge of one of the upper docks, watching as Arthra ran across her green lit conveyor belt into the dusk.

"You see," said Tet to the oldest nobleman. "It's as I said. Terrors of the Archelux."

The nobleman nodded. Behind the few that stood with Tet were several others, the older woman, the boy, in shackles now.

Tet motioned to one of his VIM. "Follow them." It flew off.

"I will have two of your repulser ships ready in a day. With a crew of your men, we will pursue them and bring them back to justice."

The oldest nobleman spoke, "Filthy barbarians."

Tet smiled.