# Passing the Algorithm Test

Like many technologies on the internet, like email, the spam has taken over. By most estimates, nearly half of all email is spam. Something similar is happening in the job market. There is a significant disconnect going on between professionals and those that want to hire them. Ian Siegel, the CEO of ZipRecruiter, said that algorithms are likely responsible for reviewing at least three-quarters of all resumes submitted for jobs in the US. This is the concept of gatekeeping taken to an unprecedented level. If you are someone in the job market looking, are there any defenses against the algorithms—any way to stand out? I have four strategies. Use artificial intelligence, score your resume, create a narrative instead of a resume, and most ambitiously of all: build an artificial intelligence version of yourself!

A significant problem here is that what used to be a skill, for instance, illustration, now must be encapsulated as Adobe Creative Suite or Sketch or Figma—some software package. Even more infuriating is that hiring managers and the people writing the job requirements know only the software packages and not the skill.  One of the top ten skills searched for (according to Ziprecruiter) is "MS Office." What is this meant to indicate? That you can write?—or understand good data visualization—or that you can write interesting scripts inside Excel? How do we, as professionals, get through to our potential clients and hiring organizations that we are more than the software that we use?

One strategy is to capitulate. If the hiring algorithms are going to look for keywords, the most important thing you can do is make sure the keywords are present in what you submit in a job application or resume. One way to do this is to feed the job requirements into an AI like ChatGPT. Create a text document that has everything you can find about the company you are applying to. For instance, the company's mission statement, what they say about their company culture, and of course, what they say the job is about. Or, if it is a RFP (request for proposal) include that. Copy and paste the whole of the document into ChatGPT and ask the question, "What are the keywords and emphasized elements of this position?"

An AI like ChaGPT will happily summarize it for you and you will have some idea of how to shift what's in your resume to tune it to what's being requested. You can even ask ChatGPT to write a cover letter based on what you give it. For that reason, the more information you can dig up about the company, the more informed a response you will get from AI. ChatGPT is not the only option. Try out Pi (http://pi.ai) (And I will have even more on this later.)

So, strategy two is to be even more specific than what I have spelled out above. There are applications on the web that can score your resume even more specifically than giving you keywords. [Resumeworded.com](Resumeworded.com) is a great example. [Skillsyncer](https://skillsyncer.com) is another. Both of these applications allow you to upload your desired job description and then compare it against your resume in order to find deficiencies—skills or experience that you should have mentioned. These are great applications and while I am in favor of them, I mention the AI alternatives above because they are free. Resumeworded and Skillsyncer both cost money and when one is looking for work, we're not always in the mood to pay a subscription.

The above two strategies are technical in nature, and not superior to truly standing out from the crowd. Keywords and scores are part of the problem with hiring algorithms. There are two clear paths around them. The first path around them is the project essay.

Portfolios are something that any artist, writer or developer should be able to provide. It's a shame that our portfolios and resumes are not the same thing so often. However, the project essay is something different from a resume or a portfolio. It's a narrative that discusses a project from inspiration to fruition. This can be difficult, but it's worth the effort to describe why you began a project and how it progressed and how you saw it through to completion. Feature a story like this on Medium or other similar sites and feature it on your resume. If you can get past the algorithms, this is a potential key to someone wanting to hire you. You can discuss your work.

Finally, I want to discuss an unusual strategy. We all know this year that AI is here and here to stay. We all want to know how to adapt. I recommend that you create an artificial intelligent version of yourself. Given how technical AI can see, you might think this is impossible for you. There are no-code options in this area. I have mostly worked with Botpress and this is not an endorsement. I simply enjoy their user interface. However, here is [a list](https://www.g2.com/products/botpress/competitors/alternatives) of companies that offer similar services; namely, use your own knowledgeable to create a chatbot that can speak for you online!

Creating your own knwoledgebase is key here. Create the longest  version of your resume that you can think of. Think of every skill you have. Think, even, of your timeline—where have you been, what have you seen. Most of these chatbot programs will simply take text documents as knowledge and attempt to answer questions based on that information. List every project and describe it. It can can seem like a daunting amount of writing, but imagine the benefit of stating a the top of your resume: "Please ask the AI version of me for further information at [your web site here]." Let the job bots talk to your bot.

The idea of one's own AI interacting with other AIs in order to negotiate a job is not, I think, far off. The sooner you can begin to poor your experience, project descriptions, knowledge and skills into text documents that an AI can discuss for you, the better your negotiation position will be as we go forward in this new AI landscape. Email spam has become filtered by the very algorithms that helped generate it. The same is likely true of the job market. It will get smarter in and of itself. In order to surf that wave, you will need to use the technology that it uses.