---
title: On the Nature of Wraiths
---
Nightmares are nightmares because while we are in the state of allowing the multi-verse to flow through our central consciousness, our problem-solving has to wake us up eventually. This is so that we can survive the nightmare. The very point of dreaming is to survive the nightmare. If we cannot survive the nightmare, if the constant problem of the dream infects us, it is possible to become, not the dream itself, but the manifestation of the nightmare. Rather than avoid a dark path, we seek it out. We begin to believe in such things like a total lack of hope. We begin to believe in things like total defeat. We begin to believe the dream that will not relinquish us from our horrors. And so, the horrors begin to follow us around even when we are not dreaming, because we create them, because we are infected with the hypnotism of only seeing the bad things played out again and again.

Life is not meant to be so. Life can be the erasure of the nightmare, for if we pay attention to the present, the nightmare is non-existent. We create it—the dream—looking for the solution that is neither necessary nor present. In the present moment, all is well. Dreams are about the past and the future; nightmares just the same. If we always imagine there to be a problem, because our feet are in the future, then the nightmare will always be present; if only for our minds to solve the problem that we think is to come. Many of us live in the future and the past. Our dreams, then, inevitably circle that which we demand solved. Much of what we dream requires no solution at all.

Some individuals, succumbing to panic and speculation about the future, regret and reformation of the past; these rare individuals gradually grow insane from the effort, and when their minds are no longer under their own control, they make wraiths. Their fears begin to inhabit the real world all around them. Wraiths seem like they are entities of their own thinking and action, but if fact, wraiths are tied to individuals. Every wraith has a host. In some sense, since the host has lost their mind, the wraith balances out the loss by taking action for the host. Only the wraith is an entity that lives in a nightmare world.

Those carrying wraiths with them possess dreams that have nothing to do with a future that they hope for, or a past they wish away, but rather a future they are deperately frightened by, and a past they beg the Universe had never happened, and in their fear of both, they create the future and past of their nightmares. A wraith exists at all times in the worst state of despair. There can be no helping a wraith. The entity, dragged around by a person driven mad by their dreams, will only drag you also into its nigthmarish existence. It will grant you no sanctuary; the way that a loved one in the present must. A wraith will grant you no success; only describing to you the ways in which you must fail or have failed. A wraith is a leach trapped in a nightmare and walking about tied to a human body, whispering nothing but hate, doubt, despair and fear in the host's ear.

I've known only one man to escape this fate through the simplest of "virtues." The Nomad, the man who held in his hands the sphere of Calathat.