# Goldilocks and the Five Bears and Their Handyman
## A re-telling of a classic tale with a modern family by R. E. Warner

Once upon a time, there was a little girl named Goldilocks. One day, while wandering through the forest, she stumbled upon a quaint little cottage. Being a curious and privileged young white girl with golden blonde hair, she decided to go inside and see if there were any good settings for her Instagram.
To her surprise, the cottage belonged to five bears: Papa Bear, Mama Bear, Baby Bear, Mother-in-law Bear, and Uncle Bear. Also there was a toolbox, so maybe a handyman had been there. But the cottage was empty as all parties had gone for a walk while the porridge cooled down. Goldilocks, being hungry from her snooping, saw the bowls of porridge on the table and decided to try them, despite hating the texture of things like oatmeal and thick soups like a bisque. Yuck.

She tasted the porridge in the largest bowl, which belonged to Papa Bear, but it was too hot. The porridge in the medium-sized bowl, belonging to Mama Bear, was too cold. The porridge in Mother-in-law Bear's had raisins! Gross! The porridge in Uncle Bear's bowl was like water. Finally, she tasted the porridge in the smallest bowl, which belonged to Baby Bear, and it was just right. So, she ate all of it. She could donate to a children's food drive later.

After satisfying her hunger, Goldilocks felt tired and decided to rest. She found five chairs in the cottage - a big one, a medium one, a fluffy one, a bean bag and a small one. She tried the biggest chair, but it was too hard. Then she tried the medium-sized chair, but it was too soft. She tried the fluffy one, but it made her itchy. She tried the bean bag and nearly fell over backwards. Finally, she sat on the smallest chair, which was just right. But unfortunately, it broke under her weight! She was hella embarrassed and decided right then and there to go on a juice diet.

Despite feeling a bit guilty about breaking Baby Bear's chair, Goldilocks decided to explore further. She found a very sad mattress in the basement and found four beds upstairs - a large one, a medium one, one covered in lace and decorative pillows, and a small one. She didn't bother with the mattress in the basement. She tried the largest bed, but it was too firm. Then she tried the medium-sized bed, but it was too soft. She didn't bother with the fancy bed since she would have to put all the pillows back. Finally, she lay down on the smallest bed, which was just right. Soon, she fell fast asleep.

Meanwhile, the five bears and their handyman returned home and discovered that someone had been in their house. Papa Bear growled. Mama Bear scolded. Mother-in-law Bear said to Papa Bear, "I told you you should have locked the door, ya' dummy." Uncle Bear said, "I bet it's immigrants!" Mama Bear said, "Uncle Bear, please!" And Baby Bear cried over his broken chair. The handyman who had just come back from the woods after alleviating himself, said, "I can fix your chair Baby Bear. No worries." The group searched the house and found Goldilocks fast asleep in Baby Bear's bed.

Startled awake by the bears' voices, Goldilocks jumped out of bed and ran out of the cottage as fast as her legs could carry her while using a GoPro wand to capture any bears that might be chasing her. That would get some clicks! Papa bear and the handyman jumped in the handyman's truck to chase after Goldilocks, but those Peloton lessons really paid off and she was super fast. She never returned to the cottage again.