Tuning Social Media

If you think social media sucks, you might not be doing it right.

It's hard, even for me, a web developer, to define social media. Back in 1992 or so, I used to use a modem to dial a local computer server that some friends of mine ran. There were shared games to play; what is now called MORP or some acronym like that. There were places to leave messages and file directories with programs to comb through and download. Nobody called that social media, but it was-highly localized social media-more like a club than the public mess that Twitter and Facebook are. And when you are in public as opposed to a private club, you need a couple of tools. One, thick skin. Two, the knowledge that, unlike a public space, you can silence, even delete other people there.
I think of social media like a radio with a lot more knobs. On Twitter, I regularly unfollow people who are using it as platform for their political opinion or leaning that direction. Following/Unfollowing-that's a mute button. That's a knob for turning down the volume of the information/opinion-lump-of-hair-clogging-the-pipes firehose that is Twitter. And there's lots of mute buttons. People are so consumed with following or being followed but I'm quite content with my low numbers. I tune into twitter feeds that are funny or goofy or regularly post scientific articles. I like pictures of dogs just like everybody else.
If you could imagine a radio that only played when it detected you were listening and cut off if it thought you were concentrating, you can do that to Twitter, too. Turn off all the alerts and only check in when you feel like it. Of course, Twitter will suggest three accounts to follow for every one you choose for yourself. Ignore those recommendations. These algorithms are morons. 
I'm not even going to talk about Facebook here (I've been off it for many years) other than to say they seem to strive to take all the knobs off the radio and appear to know better than you as to what you might want to listen to. Screw that noise.
Youtube has a similar problem. It's very hard to tune. Most of what Youtube thinks I want to see is a total misunderstanding. I watched one UFO video Youtube!-stop trying to send me down the rabbithole of aliens-built-the-pyramids crap. The fact that there is no way to tell Youtube "mute this channel"-i.e. never show me content from this channel again seems to me antithetical to the idea of an Internet TV channel! I don't watch Fox News on the TV; don't want it on Youtube, regardless of what your algorithm is trying to do.
Humans just never look at the comments. I'm not sure when Youtube implemented the upvote/downvote mechanism for comments, but the comments have definitely improved in the last few years. That's something that early social web sites (like Slashdot, kids!) seemed to intuitively understand and design towards. [Potential cut] Modern social web sites/apps seem to want to steer you away from filtering the drek of the common opinion.
I never follow an Instagram account that has more than a few selfies-and in that event I probably know you, so it's cool. Selfies-that's a different gripe-nothing to do with the interface of social media; more to do with our ongoing obsession with fame and celebrity.  In general though, I have no complaints about Instagram itself and its ability to be tuned. I know there is this weird phenomena of FOMA or Keeping-up-with-the-Joneses syndrome because of some of the accounts on Instagram. Materialistic nonsense that can bring your ego down and make you feel bad about your on life. Tune it out.
Among the best of commenting systems, the champion has to be Reddit. From day one they seemed to be gearing there system to bumping up the good stuff (like Slashdot, Kids!-and uh, that other Digg-something site?) I greatly enjoy Reddit even though I am perfectly aware that there is tons of horrible flotsam and NSFW pollution. But can you really argue with following r/aww or r/humansbeingbros? Reddit makes tuning it an art. Topics are specific, there are people in charge of the forums, crap gets voted down and even disappears from your view!
[Need a portion here about the Twitter tree phenomenon and the idea that the interface is bad.]

Note: Part of the problem with Youtube is that there is no way to "tune" it. You can't block content makers you don't like. You can't, say, create a keyword list of subject matter you want to hear about or, for that matter, subject matters you *don't* want to hear about. I'm a few episodes behind on the Disney+ TV show "Andor" and all Youtube wants to do is spoil the show for me.

https://news.mit.edu/2018/study-twitter-false-news-travels-faster-true-stories-0308