## Where I am Coming From

What I want to say here in this introduction is simply what the title says: to let you know where I am coming from. The reason for that is twofold. I don’t want to be construed as either an expert in recovery or zen. And I don’t think my personal beliefs necessarily enter into why I think these reflections on these selected Zen koans are useful.

I hope to have written these thoughts and reflections from such a vantage point that it won’t matter if you are just curious about Zen or a Zen master. It won’t matter if you are in a recovery program or not. It won’t matter if you believe in one god or many or none. I find that many problems and processes in many recovery programs are meant to serve as an answer to a question of why—and I find no need to have that question answered. I am in recovery (it is a practice) because I  must be. I was very unhappy with my life and I wanted to change.

Zen, as a philosophy, is attractive to me for many reasons, but as is shown in the first Koan here, enlightenment is found in not knowing the answer to the question why. I have a scientific mind, and while I desire physical proof of most matters, I still find that I do not require an answer to the question why. Why are we here? Why is anything here? When is now? What is right or just or good and why? I love these questions, but I do not tend to settle on answers to them.

So, when I say that recovery is a practice, and that the why of it doesn’t matter, I think of two other practices that I have. One is my writing. I write every day. At some point in my life, there may have been a reason why, but that reason fell by the wayside some time ago. I write every day because I write every day. I find that this happens with most practices. At first it takes effort and a goal or a dream. Then it takes grit and in many ways becomes an effort that enshrines the practice itself. It becomes ritual, I suppose. Then, the practice is just part of you, maybe even comes to define you. I, in part, write every day these days because my day feels incomplete if I don’t.

My other practice is healthy living. Three years ago I was diagnosed with psoriatic arthritis, a disease of the immune system akin to diabetes or lupus. It has rendered my right index finger useless—a real hit for a writer who loves to write by hand. When my rheumatologist informed me of the diagnosis, he put it plainly, “I have bad news for you. You have an incurable disease. You’re likely going to have to deal with it for the rest of your life. The best way we know how to fight it is through diet and exercise.” I was not a person who cared about diet and exercise. I still am not a person who just does diet and exercise. I’m not where I am in my writing practice as I should or could be with healthy living. I need to work harder. I am, however, at a point where I enjoy my successes because I am not in pain! Still, I have a ways to go before healthy living is second nature. I love candy.

The irony is that addiction can follow this same process: there is a reason why we do it (entertainment or self-medication), then we just do it, then it comes to defines us and drive us. It’s odd, however, to think of an addiction as a practice. It seems so much like the opposite because we don’t usually intend to get addicted to some substance or an activity. 

I am not a Zen master. I do have a Master’s degree in psychology, but not clinical psychology. I studied cognitive science and in doing so learned a great deal about neuroscience.  *I am still an addict*. So, I don’t want this work, this book, to come across as anything like a final word. My substances of choice are (in no certain order): processed sugar, alcohol, nicotine and caffeine. They are in different stages of defeat, but I am by no means in a place where I can say I am free of their control. Some in the recovery world would say that I can never be free of my addictions. Perhaps. The jury is out on that for me and this book in many ways is an attempt on my part to meditate on that.

[Nicotine molecule]

I smoked cigarettes (and the occasional pipe or cigar) for twenty-seven years. I have largely turned away from it for four years. I do, now and then, have a cigarette. Sometimes I just have one and no urge to have more. Sometimes the urge to have another is powerful. But I am not remotely close to the smoker I was. It’s nice to have this experience, because I somehow did it without a recovery program or help from anyone. It was a very self-guided recovery and it gives me hope that my other addictions may be defeated similarly.

[Sucrose molecule]

I wouldn’t even have considered processed sugar as an addiction had it not been for my immune system disorder. ETC

[Alcohol molecule]

Alcohol has been a much more difficult fight at times and one with dire consequences. Alcohol has put me in jail on more than one occasion. It has caused me to hurt people I love. It has caused me to seek it out in secret. I went to a rehab for alcohol. I wish I had gone sooner, but it may be good that I went when I did and where I did because it was not easy at that point. A more comfortable rehabilitation facility might have made it too easy to go back to heavy drinking.

I attempted to go in to recovery rooms like AA and NA in the hopes of finding a path to stopping my drinking, or maybe curb it. That did not work. One aspect of twelve step recovery rooms that I found difficult to get past was simply Step 1. In AA, this is formulated as “We admitted that we were powerless over alcohol—that our lives had become unmanageable.” I could not get past the word “powerless.” And I couldn’t get over it for strangely dichotomous reasons. One, I don’t believe in free will—I’ll get back to that in a minute. Two, if I am taking the step to get help, how am I powerless?

I found powerless to be a poor choice of words. What I was not  doing was admitting that I needed help. Seeking help and being powerless may seem synonymous to some, but it is not to me. Taking the step to ask for help is actually quite empowering. Going in to a rehab program helped me see the advantage of being around people who were already familiar with my struggle. There was no need to mince words; they already knew where I was coming from. Some of them were on the road ahead of me and seeing their successes and getting their earnest encouragement gave me hope.

Other steps were also things I found difficult. Step 2 is “We came to believe that a Power greater than ourselves could restore us to sanity.” And Step 3 is “We made a decision to turn our will and our lives over to the care of God as we understood Him.” Where do I begin with these two?

I do not consider addiction to be a disease or insanity, but rather a disorder of the brain. It is a nefarious disorder because it can convince you that you do not have a disorder. To call this insanity is to define an awful lot of behaviors and habits as insanity and I would prefer to reserve the word insanity for brain disorders that are not as easily treated. 

Addiction may not be curable, but it can be curbed, perhaps reversed. Certainly the brain can be physically rehabilitated. We have pictures (MRIs) of that very process occurring over time. Victims of strokes and head trauma can suffer much greater physical injury to the brain than those suffering from addiction and those brains can be rehabilitated. I do not believe that addiction, which causes physical changes in the brain and damage in most cases, is in a category that is different. Rehabilitation is possible.

I also do not believe in anything metaphysical. I believe the Universe to be deterministic. Particles obey the fundamental laws of physics and make atoms and atoms make molecules and proteins are molecules which make cellular creatures which make multicellular creatures and creatures with brains and nowhere in that process is there room for free will. As complicated as the brain is, it is fundamentally physical. In short, There is simply no mechanism that I am aware of for me to give my will to anything; I don’t have it to give. Every choice I ever make was determined at the beginning of the Universe.

Sorry to get heavy, but that’s how I grok the Universe.

However, that may not be true for you. Belief is a powerful thing and it is possible to have faith in the metaphysical if you define faith as belief without evidence. I do believe that belief can have physiological effects. The placebo effect in medicine is a very real phenomenon. If you take two groups of people and give group A sugar pills (or something ineffectual) and group B actual medication, some percentage of group A will gain a benefit or even suffer side effects. [SOURCE] There is even a nocebo effect in which doctors can harm their patients by framing illnesses in a cynical way. [SOURCE]

Belief is personal and powerful. 

[Caffeine molecule]
Caffeine is... well.