---
title: The Professor and the Zen Master 
created: 2025-01-14
categories: learning, preparation
---

## The Professor and the Zen Master

### Prepare Yourself

There was a professor who had heard about Zen and wanted to learn more. He had read many tomes and down much research but thought there could be no substitute for speaking with a master. He went to see a Zen master who was pleased to receive him. The Zen master made tea and began to pour the professor a cup of tea as the professor told him all of what he had learned so far about Zen. The master poured the tea until the cup was full. The professor continued to explain. The master continued to pour the cup and flowed out over the rim and into the saucer. The master continued to pour.

The professor exclaimed, “You must stop pouring! The cup is full. The tea is going to run onto the table.”

The Zen master stopped pouring and said, “It is the same with you. How can I teach you the mysteries of Zen when your mind is full of facts and concepts?”

“First you must empty your cup.”

* * *

Many times in recovery, we think that we “have it”. Wee see a cure in place of a practice. The confident addict says, “I got this. I know how to control this.” They have not admitted that they are powerless over the substance they abuse; that their desire will yield great suffering no matter their attempts at control. Addictions only generate more desire, and so more suffering. If we have urges (which we will) and have no practice when we don’t, then we will repeat our behavior. Recovery must be a practice because addiction is incurable. We must empty our cup of the notions of cure and control.