---
title: The Great Teacher
created: 2025-01-15
categories: mind, zen, acceptance, conflict
---

## Is That So?

### Acceptance

The Zen master Hakuin was praised by his neighbors as one living a pure life.

A beautiful Japanese girl whose parents owned a food store lived near him. Suddenly, without any warning, her parents discovered she was with child.

This made her parents very angry. She would not confess who the man was but after much harassment at last named Hakuin.

In great anger, the parents went to the master. “Is that so?” was all he would say.

After the child was born it was brought to Hakuin. By this time he had lost his reputation, which did not trouble him, but he took very good care of the child. He obtained milk from his neighbors and everything else the little one needed.

A year later the girl-mother could stand it no longer. She told her parents the truth – that the real father of the child was a young man who worked in the fishmarket.

The mother and father of the girl at once went to Hakuin to ask his forgiveness, to apologize at length, and to get the child back again.

Hakuin was willing. In yielding the child, all he said was: “Is that so?”

* * *

So many things and events will arrive at our doorstep that we do not choose and could not see coming. To fight in these matters can be a reasonable thing but for the addict, caution is required. Resistance will cause frustration and stress which can lad us back down the path of using. Avoidance only allows us to place consequences further away in time; they often arrive one way or another.

Acceptance is often taking the action of no action. This is what Hakuin is doing when he asks, “Is that so?” He merely accepts karma or destiny or the challenge the Universe hurls at us when we least expect it. In other word, shit happens.

If you believe in free will, know that the reed that does not ben is the one that most often breaks. If you believe in a deterministic Universe or preordination or god’s plan, then acceptance should com easily to you because it could have been no other way.