## The Twelve Steps From A Zen Perspective

### NA Step 1
> “We admitted that we were powerless over our addiction, that our lives had become unmanageable.”[^1]

[^1]: A quick note on tense: this is just because of who I am. I don’t know why these precepts from NA are written in the past tense. There’s a built-in nostalgia to that that bothers me. I have put these so-called Zen re-formulations in the present tense.

Getting through denial is the essence of the first step. First, you must admit that you have a problem.

However, I could not get past the word “powerless.” And I couldn’t get over it for strangely dichotomous reasons. One, if I am admitting that I have problem especially because things are not as I want them, and I am engaging the steps to get help, then how am I powerless? The statement is paradoxical. How did we come to this state of powerlessness if not by choice or power or of our own volition? How did our lives becomes unmanageable if we had not chosen to allow it? Two, I don’t believe in free will, but I’ll get back to that later. 

I found powerless to be a poor choice of words. What I was not  doing was admitting that I needed help. I tried to fix myself many times. I tried to simply abstain. I was not convinced, for a long time, that I needed help. However, while seeking help and being powerless may seem synonymous to some, that is only a sad fact of our culture’s pick-yourself-up-by-your-bootstraps delusional thinking. Taking the step to ask for help is actually quite empowering. Going in to a rehab program helped me see the advantage of being around people who were already familiar with my struggle. There was no need to mince words or hide my feelings or even feel guilty; they already knew where I was coming from. Some of them were on the road ahead of me and seeing their successes and getting their earnest encouragement gave me hope.

So, for myself, I re-formulated Step 1 thusly:

### Zen Step 1
> We admit our choices were making our lives unmanageable  because our desires had become overpowering.

This re-formulation accomplishes something important for me.  The step is no longer paradoxical. We must make up our own minds that we are out of control. Again, the first step is admitting that you have a problem in your thinking. You are choosing to see that you are making poor choices. You are making a meta-choice. This *requires* choice. Choose to continue on and face the consequences or see that the consequences are not what you desire and choose change.


### NA Step 2
> “We came to believe that a Power greater than ourselves could restore us to sanity.”

I do not consider addiction to be insanity. I do not consider living with an addiction to be insanity. We like to colloquially define insanity as “Doing the same thing over and over again and expecting different results” sand I’ve often heard applied to addiction, but it’s a mis-labeling. That’s not really what the addict is doing. We are getting *exactly* the results we want by doing *more and more* of the same thing. It’s everything else that is collapsing around us. There’s nothing insane about doing something that makes you feel good. That’s why we do anything.

The dopamine system that drives us does exactly that all the time, whether the thing causing the dopamine release is good or not. Our brains do not discriminate one dopamine trigger for another. The problem arises from our lives falling out of balance because that one dopamine trigger becomes too important.

As for the matter of a higher power, why higher? What is higher? In the air? Smarter than us? It is a misconception that matters like evolution have a goal; that greater intelligence equals greater. It’s unfortunate not to see the order and calm in that which is small—or lower? With many addicts, deluding ourselves in to *being* a higher power is part of the problem. We fail to see that we have become animalistic machines, incapable of balance.

So, I re-formulated Step 2 as

### Zen Step 2
“We sought help from that in nature and those among us who better understood balance, order and calm.”

This formulation allows for the sentiment of a higher power without requiring it. If one believes in the power of a meta-physical being and that belief works, then utilize it. Perhaps the addiction has caused you to become uncoupled from your higher power. There are ways to look at nature and see chaos and choose to emulate that. There are ways to look at nature and see order and choose to emulate that. It is possible to be a balance of both. This is the yin and yang.

This formulation spells out the need for a desire for help, while retaining the ability to do so. It incorporates the idea that our basic choice is to *listen*. The next step then is to listen.

### NA Step 3
“We made a decision to turn our will and our lives over to the care of God as we understood Him.”

First and foremost, a niggling detail: Why Him? Get over it. The inherent chauvinism in this statement is just transparent, let alone the silliness of the idea of an all-powerful metaphysical being of any kind reproducing to make more little baby gods. So It’s an It. But the point is moot.

As I said earlier, this is about making a decision to listen—to whomever or whatever. Pay close attention to the first koan and reflection that I put in this book. “How can I show you what Zen is when your cup is already full? First you must empty your cup.”

I also persoanally do not believe in anything metaphysical. I believe the Universe to be deterministic. Particles obey the fundamental laws of physics and make atoms and atoms make molecules and proteins are molecules which make cellular creatures which make multicellular creatures and creatures with brains and nowhere in that process is there room for free will. As complicated as the brain is, it is fundamentally physical. In short, There is simply no mechanism that I am aware of for me to give my will to anything; I don’t have it to give. Every choice I ever make was determined at the beginning of the Universe.

Sorry to get heavy, but that’s how I grok the Universe.

However, that is likely not true for you. Belief is a powerful thing and it is possible to have faith in the metaphysical especially when you define faith as belief without evidence. I have seen ample evidence that belief can have physiological effects. The placebo effect in medicine is a very real phenomenon [SOURCE]. If you take two groups of people and give group A sugar pills (or something ineffectual) and group B actual medication, some percentage of group A will gain a benefit or even suffer side effects. [SOURCE] There is even a nocebo effect in which doctors can harm their patients by framing illnesses in a cynical way. [SOURCE]

Belief is personal and powerful. What I simply mean to do with this step is include individuals like me who do not possess faith, or who may believe in a form of determinism. It is curious that even though I don’t believe I possess free will, I still make choices and I still feel responsible for them. My belief has not turned me into a nihilist. I still want to beat my addictions. It just so happens that I’ve always wanted to do this now since the beginning of time.

### Zen Step 3
We make a decision to give up what we thought we knew and listen to those who can teach and that which can show a new path.

Addiction may not be curable, but it can be curbed, perhaps reversed. Certainly the brain can be physically rehabilitated. We have pictures (MRIs) of that very process occurring over time. Victims of strokes and head trauma can suffer much greater physical injury to the brain than those suffering from addiction and those brains can be rehabilitated. I do not believe that addiction, which causes physical changes in the brain and damage in most cases, is in a category that is different. Rehabilitation is possible.

## NA Step 4
“We made a searching and fearless moral inventory of ourselves.”

Thus step is pretty all right by me. Morality refers to personal or cultural principles of right and wrong. It is often shaped by religion, upbringing, or personal beliefs. Morality tends to be subjective and varies between individuals or societies. This is appropriate here. Maybe you are a government revolutionary and you realize that your addiction is keeping you from effectively killing as many government soldiers as you should. Within your universe of morality, it still matters that you recover.

This step is also about rigorous honesty because we addicts learn to lie to ourselves. We ignore situations that have become untenable. We allow ourselves to behave in ways that a former self or a non-using self would find shameful. Chances are good that if we have committed to Step 1, we are ashamed. We can see that we have ceased to do good and put out substance or activity of choice ahead of those we love and our own well-being. We have to become clear with ourselves abbot what is wrong in order to begin to make changes.

## Zen Step 4
We make a searching and fearless moral inventory of ourselves.

## NA Step 5
“We admitted to God, to ourselves, and to another human being the exact nature of our wrongs.”

Dwelling on the past is so poisonous for so many reasons. Guilt and regret are a pitiful states, but they can serve a purpose. One way to alleviate guilt and regret is to simply ask for forgiveness.

## NA Step 6
We were entirely ready to have God remove all these defects of character.

## NA Step 7
We humbly asked Him to remove our shortcomings.

===

Zen Step 1
We admit that our choices were making our lives unmanageable  because our desires had become overpowering.

Zen Step 2
We seek help from that in nature and those among us who understood order and calm.

Zen Step 3
We make a decision to give up what we thought we knew and listen to those who can teach and that which can show.










Step 8
We made a list of all persons we had harmed, and became willing to make amends to them all.

Step 9
We made direct amends to such people wherever possible, except when to do so would injure them or others.

Step 10
We continued to take personal inventory and when we were wrong we promptly admitted it.

Step 11
We sought through prayer and meditation to improve our conscious contact with God as we understood Him, praying only for knowledge of His will for us and the power to carry that out.

Step 12
Having had a spiritual awakening as a result of these steps, we tried to carry this message to addicts, and to practice these principles in all our affairs.

Zen Step 4
We make a searching and fearless moral inventory of ourselves.

Zen Step 4
“We made a searching and fearless moral inventory of ourselves.”

Zen Step 4
“We made a searching and fearless moral inventory of ourselves.”

There is much about these formulations that are really about order and defeating entropy.
