---
title: Who Dreams Whom
---

The strangest dream I ever had though, was not nearly so desperate—or even frightening—but it came with a very strange realization.

In this dream I was wandering through a house that seemed to have no design as well as no exits. Every hallways lead to two more hallways or occasionally a dead end room with sparse furniture and always, if there was a window, it was draped with thin curtains that only illustrated that it was twilight outside and that it was getting late. Every time I reached a room with a window (or windows) they only seemed to indicate that it was getting later and I felt more and more a sense of hurry—that I really needed to get out of this maze of a house.

Wallpaper and other accouterments seemed to change from area to area, from hallway to hallway as if I were wandering from one added-on section to another. Even the seals between intersecting walls seemed like they didn't match up entirely. The halls, were not empty, however, but rather as bustling as a high school hallway. In fact, despite looking nothing like a hallway, the whole place had the distinct feeling of, in fact, feeling like a hallway. Everyone, everywhere, seemed to be going, in groups of twos and threes, to some other part of the building with a definite purpose. Now and then, a group of people (all shabbily dressed) would stop and ask me if I was lost.

At first I told everyone that stopped me that, no, I was not lost. No thank you, and I would quickly move on. But as the light continued to fade and as it became more and more clear that everyone else seemed to know where they were going, I became a little more desperate and started to tell people that I didn't know where I was going. However, when they tried to ask me where I was going I couldn't tell them and eventually they gave up trying to help me.

Finally, this kind red-headed, gypsy-looking woman took the time to ask where I was going. When I couldn't answer that, she asked where do you want go? I said that I really juts wanted to leave, that surely there was a way out, and could she please show me that. Instead, she removed a book from one of her bags and held it out to me, saying "I think your answer is probably in here." I buckled but again insisted that no, i just needed an exit and could she please point me to one.

She opened the book and began paging through it, saying that all the answers were in the book. She was sure of it. In fact, she told me, the book was why everyone in the compound knew where they were going.[^13] She again insisted in handing me the book. I took it in frustration and began paging through it and it was utter nonsense; and that's when it clicked. I focused on some sigils on the page and just watched as they wormed around on the paper, fading in and out. No amount of focus allowed me to read the pages. Maybe because my waking mind is constantly reading, it became clear that I was in a dream. And that's when the strangest thing of all occurred.

I handed the book back to her and said something along the lines of "I am certain that there are no answers are in that book, because we are in a dream. Try to read something in it."

She puzzled over the book, flipping from page to page, and I again, emphasized that she needed to pick one page, one phrase and focus on it. Don't you see, I said, there's nothing there on the page. It's not there because we're in a dream.

She looked up at me bewildered, but then smiled. "We *are* in dream." She seemed quite pleased with that, and I said, "Let's get out of here." I took her hand and she began guiding me down to the end of the hallway, through a door and out into the dying light over a bay.  Suddenly, alone, I stared out over the water; it was an urban bay. There was a freighter, and all along the shore were steel towers and cranes.

Without warning the freighter exploded.[^14] It was magnificent to watch, the concussion waves pushing out from the explosion and kicking up water and spray and little particles, and I had to strangest feeling of comfort as the concussion wave washed over me and I didn't even flinch. It just raced past me as a chaotic wind. I didn't even close my eyes, but I did wake up after a moments of standing in the explosion. It wasn't at all like waking up from the nightmare it might have seemed to be. I just woke up and wondered who in the world I had convinced, in my dream, that she was dreaming. Her face seemed so familiar.

[^13]: Dreams are always fuzzy things; I'm the first to admit. But a word like "compound" sticks with you even when you wake up. I believe that memory is mostly about salience of connections in your memory. The halls in your dreams are semantic connections and when you wake up with a word like "compound" in your memory and can't remember thinking of the word for the last several days, it's because your mind has made some kind of semantic connection. In your dreams, you're reviewing experience from the past day (or several days) and your brain is trying to "solve the problem." I put "solve the problem" in quotes because I have no idea what the problem is.

    In this particular case, I actually when through my journal entries from the previous several days and just saw no indication of what I was observing, no mention of the word compound. I even searched emails from the previous few days for the word compound. It did not appear. I'm not mystical about these things, I just think that in this case, the word "compound" had something to do with the problem I was trying to solve. But, also at this particular time, the only problem I was trying to solve was getting my grading done soone enough that I could get home in time for dinner.

[^14]: I watch too many action movies.