---
title: Calathat
---
I read anything and everything for a long time, or rather anything that was handed to me. It wasn't for a while—maybe fifth grade—that I started to gravitate towards the fantastical. I read things like Tolkien and the Dragonlance Chronicles, all of the Discworld novels like "The Colour of Magic" and "Mort", Raymond E. Feist and the Magician series, the list goes on. I had halcyon days and days to read to my heart's content. I still cherish that time so much, that I've never thought of retirement as anything other than a return to that paradise of words and imaginings. Reality is overrated. Living in my head is my natural habitat.

And so I read. Then I took to making maps of the places I wanted so badly to visit. Then I took to making maps of my own. I made countless maps of a world that I called Darung. At first it was a village and a valley and a castle. And then, that turned our to just be a small part of the world. There was a desert and then there was an orient. There were dangerous trade paths, and I started writing about the people who made the journeys on those paths.

At some point, for a birthday, or some holiday, my parents gave me a hardbound notebook and I began to fill it up with maps and secrets and stories. Sometimes the stories weren't even about characters that I liked or had imagined; sometimes the stories were about the stories before the stories. Sometimes I would write the legends of Durang—things that happened thousands of years before any of my own characters' adventures. I wrote the legends that my characters would talk about. I poured over the Bible to look for patterns in it and I began the process of writing what I considered to be the Bible in the world of Durang.

I really have to stop hear for a moment and think about the ingenious naivety of that activity. If only I'd known just how many versions of that book there were; how many missing books there were. If I'd known that there were so many holy books and collections of legends, would I even have begun that gargantuan task? You know, I still have some that "Bible of Durang" lying around. Wanna read it, Rausch? I suppose not. I suppose you are just interested in something that's literal and actual. You want me to write about my actual life when you've single-handedly destroyed it. As grateful as I am to the folks at the University for lightening my workload, that is/was my life. And I liked it.

Anyway, as much as I enjoyed creating my own world, the maps and the people looked ever more sparse. I began to look to "real" books about fantastic places such as the ancient worlds of China, Japan, Persia, Greece and Rome. At some point in eighth grade I devoured the Travels of Marco Polo. It helped that much of what was taught in school in history classes covered some of these subjects, but I always felt those course were little more than timelines and lists of facts. They so rarely really told the stories of history like stories. Still, any compendium is a good place to start when you want to know more.

In high school I was reading the particularly Americanophile literature of my English courses, but on my own I was beginning to dig into literature that came from elsewhere. Encountering Gabriel Garcia Marquez was a major launching point for me. marquez lead me to Julio Cortázar and his ingenious books that showed me for the first time that books were more than series of words. There was a concept that could be toyed with. At about the same time I was reading "As I Lay Dying" by William Faulkner for my English class, I discovered Cortázar's "62: A Model Kit." In "62" the book takes the form of a non-linear narrative that can be read in many different orders. Of course, as everyone knows, "As I Lay Dying" is also somewhat non-linear in the way it jumps from character to character in different parts of their timelines. This was a revelation.

By the time I reached college, I had all but given up writing my own stories and was, instead, completely focused on unearthing the nature of the book, examining works that toyed with the concept of the novel itself.

To put it mildly, Rausch, you can demand whatever you want of me and use duress to force what I'm writing into some 50,000 page diatribe, but what you won't be able to do is ever claim that this is not a novel—know matter what path it takes from here. I've seen what books can be; I've read the most bizarre of experiments: books that are puzzles, books that present themselves as non-fiction, books that never end, books that wrap in on themselves, and there just is no common objective form. If the story is compelling, then the story is compelling. I won't be so presumptuous to think that what I'm writing here is compelling, but for all its jumbled parts, it is a novel. It is a novel that I hope against hope will have no end. I hope that when we catch you and I have my wife and child back, it will just stop, and anyone reading will no that you were defeated and that my wife and child are safe.

This is my wish: that this madness ends, no matter if it shows me some sort of truth. It's not unlike the magic sphere that Reza Bahadir talks about in one of his re-tellings of an ancient Persian myth. There was a dark crystal sphere called the Calathat. It was known that the sphere had two magical properties. One, it would grant a single wish. Two, once the wish was granted, the Calathat would vanish and bury itself somewhere else in the world. The payment for the wish was high. Once your wish was made the sphere would show you what you truly desired. In the stories, this was never what you wished for, and knowing that, no matter what wish had been granted, left men in desperate places.

There is a legendary individual known only in records as the Nomad who encountered the Calathat. Although no one has ever known what the Nomad precisely wished for, he was given eternal life at least in part of his wish. But the Calathat also showed him what he truly desired and the revelation drove the Nomad insane. Instead of having his heart's ultimate desire, he was made to live or eternity without it. Beware of old madmen that you meet when traveling on the road, for any of them could be the Nomad.