{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1187\cocoasubrtf390
\cocoascreenfonts1{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 LucidaGrande;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\fi1089\sl312\slmult1\pardirnatural\qj

\f0\fs26 \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
### Canto 20\
\
#### In which Able discovers some odd artifacts peppering the desert at the edge of the Scruff.\
\
When he comes to the bottom of the hill, where the giant structures sit, Able puzzles over them.  They are four or five times taller than he is, made entirely of solid sand-pocked stone, and somehow menacing. Staring at them and speaking to the Dustfish, Able says, "They do look like letters." He turns the the dustfish, "Letters are things that people write down in order to save sounds for later." He looks back to the objects. They are like letters in that they are square and have angles and many parts and lines that intersect, but then they are not like letters in that they have no curves and letters are flat whereas these things were not.\
\
Letters came in all different kinds. Sometimes, when his father was far away in the fields, Able would gather some tablets from the fields and lay them out side by side. It was always risky because his father strictly forebid Able and his brother to ever try to learn to read them--reading them meant making the sounds that the letters were. And Able always wondered what would happen if he made the sounds. He always looked at the tablets in silence, going from one shape to the next, always too frightened to utter a sound while looking at them, because he did not know what kind of magicks would occur if he made the right sound while looking at the right symbol.\
\
What he did notice when he was looking at them was that many of the tablets had many different kinds of letters on them. There might be one kind of tablet that had letters that would swoop a lot and all the letters might meet together at the bottom, but then many of the tablets had letters that were very distinct from one another, like a line of neighboring fortresses. Sometimes letters were little more than a box or a circle, but then sometimes the letters were complicated enough to appear to be a picture of a tree or a flower or person.\
\
Lost in memories, Able stares at the giant blocks before him that are like letters but not like letters, like boxes that have melted together to make broken useless furniture. He daydreams about being able to write, and then about being able to write in boxes! He turns to the dustfish, who has floated up to near the top of one of the geometric golems, "Wouldn't that be something?" He puts his finger out in the air and traces imaginary shapes. Suddenly, he seats himself in the shadow of one of the structures and reaches down into his rucksack and pulls out two of the rollys. He beings re-arranging them, pulling them and makes them in to two discs with one flat edge so that can sit on the ground and face one another. He pulls a small branch-like piece off of one of the rollys, which trills in shock. "Don't worry, I'm going to give it back." Then he presses and pushes on the a few times and for a brief moment a light shines between them, which slowly fades away to nothing.\
\
Splitting the branch part in to two pieces connected at one end like tweezers, he reaches in between the two mistakes and he pulls a small sliver of light into existence. "Look at that!" His other mistakes and the dustfish have all now gathered around him to watch. After a few more minutes of pulling and teasing, a small transparent replica of one of the giant structures sits hovering in the air between the two disk mistakes. Able turns to the Dustfish, very pleased with himself. "I can write letters that aren't flat!" He pauses though and looks at the ground where he sits. "I wish I knew what any of them meant."\
\
But just then, a sound comes up from out of the dunes, a sound that sends chills straight down Able's back to his toes. He has never heard anything like it, but it frightens him to its core.  Almost blending with the wind running over the sand dunes comes a low, low call. It starts in short bursts like an alarm of some kind and then ends with a long howl like a giant animal crying out in pursuit of prey.}