{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1187\cocoasubrtf390
\cocoascreenfonts1{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 LucidaGrande;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\fi1089\sl312\slmult1\pardirnatural\qj

\f0\fs26 \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
### Canto 22\
\
#### In which Able discovers an underground cavern filled with Life\
\
Able tumbles and rolls for several minutes down the small tunnel until finally he falls out of it only to land on soft ground in the dark. The air is very cool and moist and there are soft noises all about, rustling and burbling. At first he can see nothing, but as his eyes adjust to the dark, he begins to make out small motes of light everywhere around him. He gets to his knees and hands and feels around on the floor for his rucksack or any of his mistakes and though he cannot find them at first he realizes that the floor is more than a floor. It's fuzzy and soft and squishy. He looks down to his his hands but it is still to dark to see. Just then, an orange glow, the Buzzing, appears near his head. "There you are." he says. "Find the others." the Buzzing dutifully begins to hover about here and there seeking out their companions and Able is very surprised by what he can see in its light; leaves. Wherever the buzzing floats Able can see branches and leaves surrounding them.\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl312\slmult1\pardirnatural\qj
\cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
It's not long before the Buzzing has located his rucksack and the Flamehat and Able crawls several feet over to where they lay and after a moment ignites the Flamehat. What he sees next is amazing and nothing like he has ever seen: a forest glade inside a cavern, the ground covered in a rich green and emerald moss, the trees covered in massive, wet celadon green leaves, and everywhere a ghostly cyan blue light. Behind him he can see the hole that he tumbled out of\'97too high up the cavern wall for him to reach\'97so he gathers his other mistakes and sets out away from where he came. With every step he takes, the thick mossy ground beneath him seems to sigh and tiny particles are released into the air from beneath his feet. "Sorry," he says to the ground, but he has to move on.\
\pard\pardeftab720\fi1089\sl312\slmult1\pardirnatural\qj
\cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
It is only a another ten yards or so before he comes to another amazing sight, a burbling creek. He's never seen anything like it; doesn't even know what to call it. To him it is just a miraculous line of crystalline water pouring across the ground. He comes to his knees at the side of the creek and sets the Flamehat down nearby. Reaching out, he gingerly places his hand into the water and is shocked. The water is very cold. He puts his fingers to his lips and tastes it and the taste is pure with no hint of salt or metal. He cups his hands and drinks a big gulp from the creek; it is totally refreshing and he sits back on his haunches to stare around the cavern in awe. Cal had told him about pumps that pull the water up from the ground. That must be where he is; wherever the water goes.\
\
A splash sound out from the creek and Able turns and lifts the Flamehat to spot the disturbance. There, across the creek, the Dustfish is rolling about in a shallow pool, flipping its tail and then lying on its belly. "Come here," he says. "I'll take that helmet off and you can really enjoy this.  The Dustfish rises up out of the creek and floats over to Able who removes the helmet, catching the Dustfish as it falls when the helmet comes off. "Enjoy!" Able says and sets the Dustfish down in the water. The Dustfish seems ecstatic and splashes and jumps and dives from pool to pool. From  away behind him, Able here's the scream of the beast from the dunes. The cry is muted and far away, but resonates down the tunnel until it exits like a hissing wind.  He turns and can still just make out the hole in the cavern wall. "I'm not going back that way," he says to no one in particular.\
\
After the cry of the beast resides, the quiet of the cavern and the trickling sounds of water return, and Able sits back on the mossy ground and contemplates the cavern. He wonders if there are more places like this elsewhere in the world. How silly would that be that people living on the harsh desert surface of the world might all this time be standing right on top of a beautiful, cool, and colorful place such as this? He walks down in the direction that the creek flows and sees it disappear into darkness, but turning around upstream, he can see are a series of hills and small waterfalls and the cavern appears to grow brighter in that direction. He turns to the now approving green Buzzing and says, "I think we should head towards the light." The Buzzing beeps three times in agreement. As Able begins to get up and gather his things, the Dustfish comes to the edge of the creek and flings half of its body up on the land, waiting. "You want to comes with us? Are you sure?" The Dustfish sits and stares. "Okay." Able takes up the Dustfish's helmet, refilling it in the creek and then attaches it to the Dustfish who proceeds to take to the air again and swim in quick circles around Able. "Okay! Okay! I'm glad you want to come too."}