{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1187\cocoasubrtf390
\cocoascreenfonts1{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 LucidaGrande;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\fi1089\sl312\slmult1\pardirnatural\qj

\f0\fs26 \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
### Canto 26\
\
#### In which Able makes his way through the passage to the fortress.\
\
The passage was long and dark and stone on all sides, completely round and very smooth. To Able it looked as though a giant worm had dug its way through the ground. The buzzing kept the tunnel lit as he waded through the stream to one side. After climbing down from the map room, back through the glade, he held on to the buzzing and let it slowly carry him down the rocky outcroppings where the stream from the glade poured down into the tunnel. It wasn't scary inside the tunnel, but the darkness and noise were unsettling. The only sound was the water rushing and the tunnel made the sound of it very loud.\
\
The group makes there way through the passage, Able stepping on the slick stone with care. The walking is made all that much more precarious because of his short leg. After falling a couple of times over several hours, Able is sitting on the cold floor of the tunnel when the Dustfish comes to swim in the air before him, and he wonders that if he could make something to help the Dustfish breathe in the air, then why couldn't he make himself something to help him walk? Without much more thought than that, Able set about fashioning a new shoe/attachment for his foot, noting that he's almost run out of the raw materials that he gathered in the scrub forest with Cal. While he works on the attachment, he wishes that there had been a way for him to get Cal away from Gef. He liked Cal and liked his company. But then, the two were brothers, so it seemed like there would have been little chance of getting Cal to leave Gef.\
\
Standing on his new leg extension, it takes Able a moment to get his balance. At the end of his new addition, where a foot would be, he had fashioned three big toes that pointed in different directions, like the toes on a bird's foot. It was very useful and when he stepped down on the artificial foot, it grasped what it was touching, making him feel very stable. He looks at the Dustfish, who is hovering near the foot, examining it. "Now we're both part mistake!" Gathering up his things, he set off through the tunnel again, gaining more and more confidence in his gait and after a while, walking more quickly than he ever had before.\
\
But moving quickly wasn't enough to get them through the tunnel all that fast.  The tunnel was long. Able tried to keep his thoughts on other things, most of which were just musings. He wondered if his father had noticed that he was gone. He wondered what Cal and Gef were doing---if maybe they were looking for him even. He wondered who had built the map room, the other buzzings and maybe the tunnel. In fact, it seemed to him, the further he had gotten from home, the more questions the world produced, and the fewer answers it seemed to give.\
\
* * *\
\
Definitely, the water was getting deeper and the tunnel larger. At several point along the way, the little party had come across new tunnels, high up the wall, pouring more water into the main tunnel.  Luckily, at one point, when Able was struggling along the curve of the wall with the water up to his waist, the green buzzing flew up a few feet for a moment to reveal a ledge along the wall. It was a struggle, but with the help of the buzzing and his new grapple-foot, Able dragged and heaved himself up on to the ledge. It revealed itself to be a path, a shelf that ran along the length of the tunnel, and as he walked along it, he looked out into the water in the tunnel and could no longer make out the other side. He said to the Dustfish, "Where is all this water coming from and where is it all going?"\
\
At one point, Able came to a place on the shelf that was recessed into the wall of the tunnel and he found a door.  Much like the map room door, the buzzing lit up blue and slid itself into an indention in the door, opening it. Inside were all manner of wheels, levers and other controls. "What do you suppose these do?" Able asked the buzzing. The buzzing, still blue, responded with a trill that went up and down in pitch. "Can it control the water?" Able asked. The buzzing beeped. Able put his hands together, letting his thumb and forefinger pinch the other thumb and forefinger, nervously switching them. He thought of all the water that was already in the tunnel and the fact that he had no idea how far they had to go until they got out. "Well, I wouldn't want to drown us. Let's leave it for now." Then he had another idea, "Maybe I can put a spot on the map so I'll remember it." He got out the map and twisted in the broken letters and then rolled it along the tunnel, but sure enough, the room was already marked. "Maybe whoever made the map and the map room knew about this too..." More and more questions.}