When you are born into the Desert of Dead Ideas—a vast wasteland of stone  tablets covered in scribbles of languages you don't know and dust—all in an irrelevant part of the world—every idea that you have, has already been thought of, and chiseled into stone. It is inevitable, in fact, that all ideas eventually become fossils in the Desert of Dead Ideas. The world—the Shattered Land—it's history has been written for eons on these stone tablets, and hidden away in the Desert. Stacks of dead ideas are piled up as high as the mesas of the surrounding arid landscape, and originality is seen as foolishness. You can sift through piles of dead ideas to find any kind of idea, but always, when you find one, someone before you always had the thought, the melody, the story, the reason; before you. The caretakers, the farmers, the acolytes of the Desert know of no such thing as originality or that any new idea ever existed in the Desert. And the caretakers of dead ideas are an ancient cult and cruel, because they ensure that you know you lack the capacity of new ideas at all, ever.

Able never concerned himself with those ideas—his Father's ideas. He concerned himself with a force he felt in the Universe that was different from the constant writ and constant stone of premise, argument, conclusion. Able wandered his Father's land and examined the tablets, but never found any principle he could recognize—nothing that looked like what he cared for. Instead, he looked to the tablets as passion that possessed desires to become more than the absolutes of just the writing on the stone. There was measurement in the work. Now and then Able found stone tablets that were what he called "mistakes". Within each of those tablets he could feel a pulse and he could shift a tablet into a... kind of being. He never knew why. Perhaps they were translated wrong. Perhaps the stone was always misunderstood. Perhaps the stones were not written by the holder of the original thought, and something of that thinker was left behind.

Now and then he would complain to his Father, an old caretaker of the Desert, and his Father would remind him and chastise him that he had no business looking at ancient old ideas that deserved nothing more than farming. The ideas, they should be collected and burned as coal for the rest of the world outside of the Desert. Black smoke rose from Able's Father's pilings of the stones that had written on them all of the ideas that had ever existed in the Shattered Land. The smoke was black and thick and dark against the gray of the Desert. Able left his father and brother to the fires.

Able paid all attention to his mother. She was very sick. She, the brightness of his life, lay buried amongst huffing, wheezing pumps that he had built. Most of the "mistakes" were taller than himself, and made by force by his Father. They, the mistakes, formed a wall of devices, pipes and hoses. He, Able, had not intended to, but his Father has insisted. He even told his Father that he was converting the works of the tablets of the Desert, though he dare not use the phrase "new idea." But, regardless, his "mistakes" worked and kept his mother alive. Able knew that the thoughts of the tablets could come alive; he also knew that his Mother would not. Not just because of the towers of mistakes he was building.`

He told his Father as much. Jebidiah—Able's Father—yelled, "You do not understand NEW ideas; you only know the discarded knowledge of the fields that I own and you have sifted through. You learn from those fields, and you know I have forbade it! ... It changes nothing. I do not know where this wicked power of yours has come from, but you will do something good with it, and you will keep your Mother alive!"

Somewhere in the valley of machines, She lay, in a tattered, gray linen nightgown. Able can not see her from where he stands for all the detritus and blankets. The little accordion towers, built only at his father's behest—his command, rather—surround her and breathe asynchronously up and down with tiny huffs and sucking sounds. The minarets of Able's design keep her alive. For now. His only power to make machines that have no will, to carry on souls that have no will as well.

Walking out from his Father's farmhouse, Able always sees stacks and stacks of tablets and rocks chiseled with writing that he cannot recognize. They are stacked so high and in such precarious piles that he dare not remove one for pulling over any mound of writing; the dust cloud his Father will notice. It's only over the years of experience that he knows to take scripted stones in hand-held pieces at a time, that he can take any care for himself. If he does this, and hides away what he thinks counts, the rest he can still present under the illusion that his leg is bad, and then he will be yelled at but mostly because he is useless and not because he has hidden anything.

He reads. And he reads carefully. Peeking out from the mounds of unknown laws and philosophies he sees here and there statements that seem like truths. But he is never allowed to deliver to his Father any truth; or rather, anything that he has read.

His Father says that the tablets are lies. His father says that every report, account, and testimony and subjective and cruel and should always therefore be dissected, torn apart and never examined. Able's Father says the height of the Mesa is the only thing that matters. The words on the tablets are useless.