{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1187\cocoasubrtf390
\cocoascreenfonts1{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 LucidaGrande;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\fi1085\sl312\slmult1\pardirnatural\qj

\f0\fs26 \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
### Canto 4\
\
#### In which [Able](/wiki/able-summary)'s brother and [father](/wiki/josiah-summary) learn of his mistakes and he is banished.\
\
When Able comes down from the Mesa, he sees that the house is quiet and enters, careful not to make a noise, frightened of waking his Father, who would demand an explanation, and frightened knowing he would have none, for Able did not know how to lie.[^1] He slowly pulls the front door shut and even winces when it slips into the jam with a low thump. He makes his way across the main room to the back hallway where his tiny room and his brother's room split off.  Then he stops, perplexed and somewhat afraid, at the entrance to the hallway upon seeing a light emanating from underneath his door; he did not recall leaving a candle lit.\
\
Pushing open the door, Able finds his brother on the floor, his mistakes spread out around the floor, all bent and smashed, some of them having lost their colors entirely. Able says nothing but stands frozen in shock as his brother, his back to Able, lords over the little entities. One of the mistakes, a silvery rolling thing that would loop around and around, tracing out ellipses of fading metallic dust, was stuck in one spot, a dent in its spherical surface keeping it from being able to move. It rocks back and forth to no avail and makes a low injured metallic whine. And before Able can say anything, his brother hefts a huge stone and brings it down on the whirly idea, mashing it almost flat. Able's brother laughs.\
\
And before Able knows what he is doing, he is rushing into the room and grabbing the stone from his brother and smashing it into his head. His brother cries out with surprise as the stone hits him in the temple, but after the second time Able hits him, he falls to the floor unconscious, a dark black ooze drizzling out of the laceration in his forehead.  Able drops the rock and drops to his knees to inspect his brother's limp body. Holding a shaking hand in front of his brother's mouth, he feels moist air, and so grabs his pillowcase and begins gathering up the remnants of his wounded mistakes.\
\
No sooner had Able gathered them then his father appears at the door, tired, stone-faced. With little emotion, this winter tree of man looks to the body of his eldest son and then looks to Able as his brow curls from granite plane into a rumble of furrows. Standing high over Able, he points his gray hand at the bag that Able holds and says, "What is that?"\
\
Able holds the bag out to his father, not knowing even how to begin to describe the ideas he had found at the edges of their land. His father takes the bag and opens it, peering inside with disdain. Removing the silver whirly, he holds it in his massive dry hands, and the little idea puffs in exhaustion, unable to escape its captor. Old Josiah puts the disgusting mutant back in the sack and reaches out to grab Able by the collar. Leading, dragging Able, the mismatched pair come to the front door of the little shack. Once there, Josiah opens the door, letting the cold howling night winds of the desert scream into the room, and throws the sack of mistakes out into the dark. He pushes Able across the threshold as well and points away into the black, "Begone from here."\
\
[^1]: At one point in time, Able's brother had broken a farming tool that their father had made. When the old man asked the boys who had broken it, both boys immediately answered that it was the other one. Able was confused at the time. Their father has never lied to them about anything, no matter how harsh or unfortunate the truth might have been. The world was destitute, mostly over, and the only point to life was to work--lying was simply not necessary. But though some trick, Able's brother had discovered that he could change reality to his liking (this was also before Able had discovered how to make mistakes). Able's brother had been punished for the lie; his father had seen through it somehow. Later he told them both, "It is the vile nature of untruths that brought this world and its dreams to nothing but dust. Would you destroy what is left entirely just to avoid some punishment?"}