---
title: The Whirlpool
---

Hiding and standing next to those metal doors that kept me in for so many years, I was joyed to bash them in just to see a history that I already knew was gone. The whole place, from concrete block walls to chipped white paint, from spray foamed ceilings to the smell, was familiar again, although amazingly more claustrophobic than it ever was. From the first end of the hallway I saw ghosts of Mrs. Mathiesan and demands of calculation. Six times twelve is seventy-two. Seven times eleven is seventy-seven. Four times eight is thirty-two. But who cares now, computers in our pockets. What was the torture for? it doesn't matter in the hallway today; I remind myself where I am and that I am not in a dream. I look at my feet. I am not in a dream. The watches' hands are not in the right place.

The room where all that math used to test me is empty and filled with dust and cobwebs now. It was important—paramount then—no longer. It is empty now and filled with broken glass, dust and markers of weather. All the desks are shadows and all their rows are gone. There is no merit in the tests that I had failed or succeeded at; the history of the room is gone.[^29]

I move along the corridor, looking for Rausch or his courier, or in fact any ghost that is moving in this decrepit and abandoned building. Three rooms on each side of the walls and at each I step in with my gun drawn hoping to see someone moving, but every time there is nothing but abandon. It's all empty. By the end of the hallway I begin to wonder why I am roaming my old elementary school with a gun. It makes no sense. I've no evidence that the courier came here or that anything related to the kidnapping of wife and daughter is here. Agent Cobb had more to say and yet I was preoccupied... how is that possible?

The dust of the place becomes my preoccupation. Not that I was only one of the students to come through here but the passage of thousands mesmerizes me. I kneel on one knee to run my finger through the dust on the shoddy tile as if to detect the movement of the past through this place. Time is done. How many bullies, bargains and failures occurred here both before and after my arrival. It's all just dust on the tile floor now.

There can be nothing of evidence here, nor is the courier here, nor was he ever. This is a dreamscape I have made up in the hopes of finding the ones that I love. Why wander through history to find something that came to me in a future far away from this place. There's no need. I should go back to where I can talk to Cobb and she'll tell me what I need to know to stop this nightmare from continuing.

I need to take a deep breath. I'm exasperating a situation that needs to be squelched. I've know idea who the kidnappers could be. I feel sure that it's Paul Nolan, but why? Cobb is after him now, and what is this that I'm doing in some abandoned elementary school? There's nothing here but ghosts.

Still, something about the space resonates with me. Have I had dreams here? I'm certain that after spending so much time amongst walls that were so non-descript—walls made of nothing but concrete cinder blocks and painted over with a cast of colors that are plebeian at best, downright mediocre at worst. How can there be any forgetting of such a place when I spent years in it? Is it just that the memory is statistical and can truly remember nothing that is unremarkable?

When a noise occurs in these halls, any rattling of some settling facet of the construction, the sound is haunting; it is the sound of the decomposition of human endeavor. It is entropy; my old enemy. Everything falls apart, everything separates into its components, even me.[^29]

[^29]: A noise. A banging of metal in the sixth grade wing. I duck down and move across the main corridor leading to the rest of the school, sidle myself up against the first classroom on the right side. This was Mrs. Corrigan's room. I revolved my shoulder against the door's edge and lead my gun into the room and there is the man in the pea coat and hoody and I recognize him.

    "What?!" Paul Nolan says.

    "You son of a bitch," I say.

    "No, no, no, you don't know Allen, you don't know!"

    "What the fuck are you doing here?"

    "You don't understand, Allen. I don't want to be here. I don't want be here!"

    I get close to him, gun in both hands. I get close to him. "What the fuck are you doing here, Paul? WHAT THE FUCK ARE DOING HERE?"

    Paul gets on his knees, all the while nattering "I don't—I can't—I'm not supposed—please don't shoot—please! Don't shoot! I know what they've done! I know what they've done!"

    "Are you Rausch!?" is all that I can scream. "Are you Rausch!?"

    "No, no, no! You don't know what Rausch is. Please, don't shoot, Allen. I'm not—I'm not."

    And then the gun goes off with an enormous bang that fills the concrete block walls of the classroom and the hallway and the school.

    And the noise is loud and frightening and Paul's pleading ceases and the room is silent and suddenly filled with dust and blood seeping out from Paul and I've no idea what I've done and it takes some before I

    Breathe.

    And then Paul is lying on the ground in the hoody and pea coat and I see his beard and I know he is the courier; was the courier; was my advisor and mentor. And I've killed him.

    I get down on my knees and try to get close to him to see if he is breathing. I check his pulse on his neck and the beat is weak. I look for where he was shot and at first I can't find it because of the layers of clothes that are on his thin frame, so I tear those away. I pull away the coat and then sweatshirt and then the shirt underneath that and what I discover is an old and pale chest. Paul is old now. He is seventy something years old and his chest is pale, with white hair and there is a bullet wound right beneath his heart. The hole itself is pulsing and blood is pouring out. He won't survive this.

    I think about it, but there is nothing to do. I've killed him.

    "Paul!" I shout.

    I shout.

    His eyes open slightly. He whispers something... my name, I think.

    "Paul," I say, "You've got to tell me who did this to us? Who did this to you?"

    He whispers again and this time I can make it out, "You."

    "No, Paul, who is blackmailing me? Who has my wife and child?"

    "You," he repeats. His breathes in, shuddering.

    "I didn't do this, Paul. Someone made you do this. I only know the name Rausch. Who is Rausch?"

    Paul looks me, his eyes glassy. "Reza. The... children." He fades again and I try to wake him. "Stay with me, Paul. Stay with me. I'll call an ambulance—just stay with me."

[^29]: This is hours later, reader. I am writing now. What do I write? The wound was fatal. What do I write? Do I tell you about how I tried to save him? There was no attempt. That the man bled out on the floor of that abandoned classroom? It was obvious from the amount of blood all over the broken tile floor. He died; right there is my arms. I thought he was Rausch. With all my heart I am telling you that I thought he was Rausch.

    But Paul Nolan was only the courier and now he is dead. He was dead hours ago.

    I have nothing to say about what I've done. The gun just... I have been so angry about Rausch... I have been so angry.

    I go through his pockets to see what he has. There is his wallet of course. There is some spare change and cash. There is what appears to be a likely burner phone—that seems worth holding on to. And, of course, he, like me, has a gun. It's a .45. I take that. Now I have two as I descend into the nightmare that Rausch has created.

    I dragged Paul's body to the edge of the playground; to the tree that I loved to read beneath. I broke open the back doors to the elementary school and I dragged him two hundred yards to that tree. His lifeless form came with me like an albatross, and the entire way I was shocked that this someone, this academic and intelligent man, had somehow gotten tangled in this stupid nonsense that Rausch began. How harmless he was, how much I had hated him as a student, but dragging his body, all I could think was how kind he had been to me. How he had laid the harshest of criticisms on me for purpose of better. It all sounded like Rausch, but it was not. All of the smugness of Rausch's missives became something else entirely; truly a puzzle or some kind of game. Paul was not Rausch. But I took his body, and I buried him beneath the tree of my contentment. It took three hours to dig the hole and I knew Agent Cobb would be calling, so I dug hard and as fast as I could.

    His body was in the ground at about sunset and I went back to the school to clean up the mess. It was impossible. I had no cleaning supplies, so I covered the last glimpses of the wound in dirt, just like I did Paul's body. No one would look for a body here if I never mentioned the conflagration; which I never would. I want Josie and Anna back.

    I am so sorry.

    This mad chase has lead me where I know not

    Reza says that it is impossible to find justice in this world, but that also it is impossible to find justice in the many other worlds that exist. Justice is for the living and those that live by its creed alone—it's nothing to do with those who have crossed its inextricable lines in the sand. Leave justice behind, and it leaves you behind. In the wreckage of this childhood of mine, I see now that what Reza said was true. I am now trapped here for good; beyond the reach of justice because I crossed its boundaries. The body of Paul Nolan is now a heavy medallion I will have to wear, and my heart knows that while I can still save my Josie and my Anna, from here on out there's no way to save myself. My hands are stained and there is no justice for me now. Still, I can save the ones I love. I need to start by finding Cobb.

    In a strange way, I expect Cobb to see in my face just exactly everything that's happened, and yet I try to convince myself the whole way home that she could not possibly know—not know, but see, perceive. She will not be able to perceive what I've been through and what I am guilty of. What does guilt look like on the human face?