---
title: A Dream and A Search
---

It is very early morning; after five, as usual of late. I am in my office after sleeping fitfully, also as usual of late. I feel like I haven't slept in weeks, and even when I do sleep it is fevered and the dreams are peppered with nightmares. There are strange nightmares: being chased by rapid dogs, fires, destroying things I love... visions of Paul. When I wake up I see, sometimes, that these things are nightmares. When the dreams are about Paul, they are all about scribblings that I am presenting to him. They are never on time; they are never what he wants. He scoffs at my efforts constantly, even though, somewhere in my mind I might know that he is a threat long gone. In the dreams, I suppose time is set aside.

How many dreams have there been in which you were back at a test you had no confidence to pass? You might be years past it, but still the mind senses the slightest pressure or fear and that one test that was utter failure for you comes racing back into salience even though you'd not thought about in many years. The dreams that are of solace are few and far between while the dreams of failure loom. This makes sense. Our minds are obsessed with solution. The simplest solution is never present in dreams. The simplest solution is to give over to witness. When we witness our dreams, the panic and simulations of danger wash away. We must recognize that our concerns and foibles are all just thoughts that vanish in the face of our recognition that we are not out thoughts. We are not our thoughts; we are the space in which those thoughts occur. We can let those thoughts come and go, and choose only the ones that yield peace.

I am also waking into a nightmare that I was not dreaming about. Paul crosses the divide: he is both nightmare when I am asleep and nightmare when I am awake. I am reminded of the Watch Man who could no longer tell his dreams from his waking life. I think his loss or death must have been pleasant compared to what I am experiencing. I trade nightmares of the unimaginable kind for nightmares all too real. The Watch Man would have found greater peace for not knowing which were true. "Was it all just  dream?" is a question he could have fairly asked. And I have to ask if I have awoken something with my own dreams or is this all a dream?

Most of the nightmares are too fast and wake me up from terror before I have even a chance to look at my feet and stand the way that I did once in the face of a destructive explosion. It seems that I have become a coward in both my dreams and my life. Still, Paul's final words have left a shadow on my brain and his words, "Reza... the Children." It makes no sense to me, but as I told Cobb, it most certainly means that Rausch is neither Paul nor is Rausch what I think he (it) is. It's a demon, a curse. More than ever, Rausch feels supernatural.

As I've said before, a dream is a model. A dream is a way for the mind to work out a problem, or many problems, or speculations about problems. A dream is a simulation for working through some potential obstacle, not even one necessarily ever encountered. Explosions are in my dreams, but I have stood in front of one.

So, to the dream:

I was standing in a decrepit warehouse that reached as far as the horizon. At first, it was nothing more than girders and aluminum walls and columns, and short of that, nothing but space and puddles. As I tried to find something—as I just had the sense that I was looking for something—I began to see stacks of papers. Just at first, there were a few pieces of paper here and there and I would look at them and see nothing and move on. As I moved on, larger stacks of paper would appear. And as I moved through them, even more stacks of paper would loom. They quickly became taller than me. And then, they began to surround me.

All the while, there was a lecture somewhere nearby; someone talking at length, droning. I couldn't make out any of the speech, it was just the droning of a voice. Though I couldn't recognize the content, I recognized the tone: a lecture. But as I began to become surrounded by the stacks of papers, I slowly realized that the lecture was somewhere in my head. I went to touch my ears and there I found earphones—the kind that go into your ear. I pulled them out to relieve myself of the sound and focus on the papers.

But the lecture would not stop. I tried to pull pages out of the stacks around me and as I did, the droning of the continuing lecture seemed to drown out the words on the page. There were clearly short and long lines of text and they contained important information, but they were all lost on me because the lecture became louder and louder. Eventually I realized that the earphones were still in my ears. When I went to touch them, they were gone, but I could hear the sound inside my ear canals, so I would dig my fingers into my ears and with my fingernails I could feel little pieces of the headphones. They had broken apart in my ear canals.

Surrounded by the stacks of papers that went all the way no to the ceiling of the warehouse, I continued to dig into my ears, further and further to remove little washers of silvery metal, little pieces of the speakers that were becoming embedded in my head! The harder I dug my fingers into my ears, the further the lecture encroached my brain. And then I began sucking in air through my nose in order to pull the pieces out of my ears; the way you might try to pop your ears from air pressure. And I began to cough. Pieces of the headphones were no in my throat and the more I sucked air in through my nose, the more they were caught in my throat and I began to choke and cough, pieces of metal being choked out of my throat.

As I choked, I grabbed the stacks of paper to balance myself, feeling that I am running out of air, choking to death on the metal. And the lecture would not cease. It continued to drone on and on and on making no sense to me at all.

I awoke in my bed, coughing and seizing. I took several moments to get control of myself and a trip to the bathroom to get a glass of water. For a moment, I still believed that the metal and pieces of miniature speakers were still in my ears. I gradually caught my breathe as well as my mind. And then, the papers in the dreams made sense. The lines were all of a particular short length at the beginning followed by longer lines in the middle, followed by final short staccato lines; they were all correspondence. They were letters.

Even in this day and age I receive letters; many of them. I keep them all. I have notes from girlfriends in high school and letters from friends over the years and letters from strangers. The beautiful thing about letters is that if you choose to engage someone in such a fashion and they choose to write back, a new communication will occur, and it will occur in a much different fashion than email. Letters allow for... space? Some of my letters to friends and loved ones have been works of art in my mind. My letters to Josie in the months when I was away from her in my last years of graduate school were beautiful. I have them because she gave me them and they are in a file, interspersed with her letters to me. If every there will be a record of our love, it will be found in that file.

But I sit in my office surrounded by piles of letters, not looking for those (though I could not resist glancing over the file and feeling an incredible warmth) but rather some more unusual specimen that stopped arriving years ago. I had put them out of my mind (hadn't I?). They were letters from an individual who had questions about Reza Bahadir; a man named Ezra Enoch. They were typed out on a mechanical typewriter, and while I found them fascinating, I only considered them a kind of performance art, for while signed, they never had a return address.

But the letters went on at length about Reza Bahadir. I never understood why or how. Part of me always thought it was Josie having a bit of fun, but whenever I confronted her, she feigned (or truly communicated) ignorance. I know who knows about Reza, but what if the stories were passed on somehow?

I put the letters into envelopes and wrap them with a rubberband. At this point, I know that Rausch is watching my every move, but will he notice if I hand Agent Cobb an innocuous stack of letters? I'll do it before the next meeting with Rasuch. I'll wait until we're in the car. Rausch cannot possibily be in the FBI's vehicles. It will be safe to hand this information over to her then. Of course, she no longer trusts me, so we'll see if it matters. *I* don't even know if it matters. It could be another dead end.

Still, when I read the letters, there's something obsessive in them. Could my writing be a distraction for something more important to someone like Ezra Enoch (which cannot possibly be a real name). I don't know, but I do know that today's hand off has to be the last one before Rausch loses his patience. Does he know about Paul? Does anyone know about Paul? I suppose I know. I suppose that it was Paul lecturing to me in the dream, speaking to me from his place in the ground now, or from that place that Reza speaks about, where consciousness is everywhere and all at once. I could dig into my ears as deep as my fingers would go and I could choke on the parts, but Paul will never stop speaking to me.

And now, on to the nightmare...