---
title: Welcome to Hormirzad
---

It's almost like as soon as Cobb spoke the words, "There is one thing we can do," here I am, in monastery-like, undecorated room. There is a bed, a desk, a chair, a laptop. Other things happened, of course, but they all occurred in a blur and a panic. And, I am certain Cobb is right. There was no plan for us to get me out of exactly where I am right now. I already tried the door, locked. The windows are nailed shut. The wound on my forearm has been stitched and bandaged. There could have been no plan for this. There is no way that I, English professor, good father, good husband, challenged writer, am sitting here in this cold attic room with nothing but a old laptop, being told that I am the very person that I am certain I made up. His name is Reza Bahadir if you haven't been paying attention. But someone—some people—in this place are utterly unconcerned with nothing of making things up. They are taking all of this literally. I cannot see how, but what's done is done.

I received the obligatory Rausch text before we left my house:

`Tues, Nov 11, 11:00am  
Dress as the courier. Come to the park.`

`Tues, Nov 11, 11:02am  
Keep your phone with you. Carry nothing but the phone,  
your writings, and your clothes.`

`Tues, Nov 11, 11:05am  
Stay tuned.`

We drive to the park. I get out of Cobb's car in the same place that I did the last drop off. I turn to Cobb and say, "If you do nothing else, find out where those letters came from—find out who they came from."

Cobb shrugs. "You're not going anywhere. The letters won't lead anywhere. Without you, Worthington, guilty or not, we've got nothing."

"I trust you, Agent Cobb, but you've got to have more than one thread running through this."

She smiles at me. It was the same smile from the night she confronted me that I was the kidnapper. She's got eyes like a cat and the smile is tight-lipped. "I don't tell you everything, Worthington. Why would you think I would?"

As condescending as the remark is, it gives me hope. I look out the window to the park. "You know, Cobb, I'm actually grateful for that. The less I know, the less it knows I think."

"So now it's 'it'?"

"I don't know what the hell we are dealing with. Part of me feels like it's more than either of us can comprehend without having all the facts."

"We'll see about that."

I open the car door. "Just hand on to those letters. I know there's something there; I'm just not seeing it."

I get out of the car and put my sunglasses on. It's actually too warm a day—even in November—to be wearing this wool hoody and pea coat, but instructions are instructions. I figure on making my way to the park bench where I (maybe) met Paul Nolan. Now, to be honest, I'm not sure it was him. It could have been a look-alike, a disguise. Rausch could have been keeping Nolan at the school under duress and he was always just a plant. I mean, could Paul have figured out how to operate the electric skateboard? I doubt it. Could he have operated a drone? It doesn't fit for me. Still, there is nowhere else to go but that bench.

The phone buzzes.

`Tues, Nov 11, 11:18am  
Want to see Josie and Anna? They're waiting for you.  
Run to the church that faces the East side of the park.  
Sprint, Allen.`

I lay into a sprint. I am no athlete and in this weather, but garb is not particularly accommodating. Still, seeing their names for the first times in a text. I do need to see them, desperately. No matter what the police think I am, I am not, even though I know more than they do the lengths I have gone to get them back.

As I'm sprinting toward the church, a tall, imposing gothic affair—steeples and everything—the front door opens and a hand begins waving at me from out of the dark recesses. Then, as I reach the bottom of the steps, both front doors open and a whole group of men dressed like me come out and surround me. I look back only to see the FBI agents disguised as park caretakers and other elements running toward the stairs as well. An unmarked car, not Cobb, slides up to the curb in front of the church. I look around, surrounded by all the men dressed like me and get swept back into the church.

Once inside, it is dark. Two men on either side of me have their hands clasped tight about my biceps and even though I am moving with them—I am desperate to see Josie and Anna—they are practically carrying me up to the stone altar at the front of the room.

The phone buzzes.

`Tues, Nov 11, 11:24am  
Where's the chip?`

The two men dragging me move to the left of the altar and into some sort of side room for the priests. The other men all seem to be moving out of the church from different exits. The two men press me up against a wall and one of them says, "Read your phone!"

I read it. I shut my eyes. I try to think of what to do. They are already pulling my coat in various directions, searching. Finally, I acquiesce, and tell them, "The forearm. The right forearm." Without warning, one of them produces a knife—a strange knife—one that I recognize—and he jams it into my arm. Before I can scream, the second man has shoved a gloved hand over my mouth. With an excruciating amount of pain, the first man pulls the tracker chip out of my arm. At the moment, I can't think anything at all, but as I write this, I know that Cobb's one plan has already gone awry. I truly hope she had more plans... even now as I am writing this, I truly hope.

And why am I writing this now anyway? There is a great deal of reason to continue this record. While I have breath in me I will continue this record. We'll come to that shortly.

After the two men removed the chip, I wish I could report to what happened but there is very little to report. They put a gag on me, a hood over my head, dragged me down some stairs, and then they waited for a long time. Of course, gagged and hooded, I cannot tell you how long they waited. In a darkness like that, there is only the wait. There is no length to the wait; it is not over until it is. But I did here a chime, like an alarm or message going off on a cell phone. Then, they started dragging me again.

I could tell that we had come out from somewhere dark into somewhere light because the blackness of the hood turned just ever-so-slightly gold. It had to be daylight. They kept dragging-walking—I wasn't resisting—me for several hundred yards? And then the next thing that happened seemed surprisingly obvious given my lack of perception. The threw me in a car truck, shut the trunk—back to black—and then drove. I'm going to save you the details of the drive. There were a few things I experienced, but they are of, currently, no use to me. We crossed over railroad tracks twice. There was a siren and a train at two parts of the journey. By far, the strangest thing, was that when the men laid me in the trunk, I thought I heard one of them whisper, "Forgive us, King of Dreams."

* * *

I can't tell you how long the drive was; I can give you a range. It was between twenty minutes and an hour. There's just no way to tell. I tried to imagine my route to say, the University, and how I might be driving that way, the speeds and all. Speed was very difficult to detect. We maintained a fairly regular speed, which makes me think we were on back highways—the two-lane affairs. But, I really have no idea. I know that after we passed over a second set of railroad ties, we made a turn on to a road that was very unused. It wasn't a dirt road, but it wasn't smooth.

Then the trunk opened. Then I was hoisted out. Then the hood and the gag were removed and I was confronted with this scene: A man in a well-pressed, white, cotton, button-shirt shirt smiling at me. Behind him, there were acres of farmland that had gone in to disuse, fields of weeds. And off to the left of my periphery was an ante-bellum style plantation mansion, which, like the farmland, had fallen into disuse. The man, aside from his white shirt, had a goatee and short cropped hair. He looked healthy, young even. I was still being held at the arms by my assailants, who still looked like versions of the courier—just like I did, I suppose. The man came forward and put his hands on my shoulders. "It's good to have you here, Allen." He paused. "Let's get something out of the way, right away. Have a look at that house, and have a look at the rightmost upper window."

The man who had me by the arms turned me so that I could see. I found the window he meant and in it could just make out two figures looking at me. Without even seeing all that much I could see it was Josie and Anna. Anna waved. I cried out. It wasn't a word. It wasn't a... imagining have a sigh of relief that empties your whole body. I went weak at the knees when all of the breath came out of me and the two men at my side were the only thing keeping me up, like pillars.

Then, the man I had first seen came between me and the window. "Now. First things first. We have to fix you up." He took my right hand, now covered in blood. "I'm very sorry about that, but it was obviously necessary. We can't have you coming to Hormirzad with a tracking chip, right?"