---
title: Session 4
taxonomy:
    category: sessions
---

All right, enough whining about how tired I am and how hard this is.[^4] I feel a little better now that I've eaten. I want to describe how I got here. When you think about it, writing some words in return for what Rausch has stolen from me is hardly any price to pay at all. I guess. There is the exception that what he has stolen from me is priceless.[^5]

I’ll start with Friday. It was Halloween. On Fridays I teach my sophomore class in American literature (course ENG 212) which mainly pertains to the years 1620 to 1945 and is at 10:15am. I wish it weren’t. I feel like students pay more attention to things like literature after lunch. In fact, I would love to teach a lunch course on literature where we meet at various food vendors—but that’s a pipe dream. We cover a dozen or so short stories and three books over the course of the semester. This ranges from very early stuff such as the Iroquois Creation story (a fascinating piece that is) to letters from Chirstopher Columbus: "Letter to Luis de Santangel Regarding the First Voyage,” and “Letter to
Ferdinand and Isabella Regarding the Fourth Voyage.”

The class started back in August and (thankfully) tomorrow and the next day the University will be on Fall break. This gives me ALL day to find you, Rausch. ALL day.

We had just (Wednesday) wrapped up talking about several of Robert Frost's poems putting us squarely into the 20th century. Over the weekend, my students are supposed to be reading the first half of Eugene O'neil's "Long Day's Journey into Night." I'll have to have some material ready for Wednesday because I know damn well that most of them will not have read the assignment. I hate to be cynical, but college kids are college kids. I will say that I might be suprised. This year's students seem unusually engaged.

You know, I feel like pointing out that I do not choose what gets read in my class. There are four sections of American Literature and it's up to the senior facutly to decide. I don't particuarly care for 19th century literature. It's just so bogged down in morality. I mean, all literature is somewhat concerned with morality, but this is Morality with a capital M. I mean, "The Scarlet Letter?" Give me a break; take a Prozac already. Give me an existential text any day. Camus, Calvino. I love that sort of work. I can get behind e. e. cummings too. What was he? Late 19th century, I think? Did he live into the 20th century? I gotta admit, I don't know. Bad professor.

look at   me     i am writing    like e e cummings

I don't know if you have a sense of humor, Rausch. Maybe at some point you'll let me know.

Anyway, I’m not sure what happened specifically Friday morning because it was not unlike all of my mornings. I get up at 6. Then breakfast, shower, the usual stuff. Once I get to my office (by 8), I try to get any writing out of the way. I work best in the mornings. I don't check email until 9:30 or so. I like to use a work strategy called the Pomodoro method.  You write or do whatever it is you're doing for 25 minutes. (I set a timer on my phone.) Then, after that, you have five minutes to stand up, stretch and do something brief, like play a game or look up something on the Internet that occurred to you. That's a caridnal rule: do NOT do research on the Internet *while* writing. It's a total time-sync and you're better off just writing a blank on the page like _________ and come back to fill it out later. Gotta keep those thoughts flowing! It's why I instituted the whole pomodoro thing in the first place. I couldn't stop looking up stuff when I was writing.

Then, another twenty-five minutes and another break. By that time it's about nine o'clock and if I'm feeling up for it, I'll do a third pomodoro. Sometimes I use the time to plan out lectures, but I've been at this for three years; I feel like I know the material well enough. And, let's face it, historical literature is not to changing much, nor is the department's opinion on what needs to be taught.

But I still don't check my email until nine thirty because I like the isolation after I leave the house. It's nice to know that there is a period in the day in the day when I am totally alone with my thoughts with no risk of interruption. You know how when a fire alarm has been acting up or just something irritating is repeatedly going on—after a while you just feel like you're not thinking or it's not quiet—you're just waiting for the disturbance to come again.

It's not unlike my thoughts about Rausch. I get about three hundred words into this effort and I think of him again. I wonder what he looks like? He's probably normal looking, if not ugly, but all I see is a ghoul. His skin is falling off his face as stares at the world through little pince-nez glasses that are just barely balanced on his massive nose that has a few warts at the base of it. You know, I feel like I know myself pretty well, but if I catch him tomorrow at the drop-off I really don't know what I might do. I have visions of stabbing him in his gut and jerking the blade around to make enough of a wound that he won't die right away but will just painfully bleed to death for an hour or so.

Again, I think of you, reader (will there really ever be any readers of this) and what you might come to think of me. I'm not like what I just described above. I really don't think I could hurt anyone. But you don't understand, can't understand what this monster took from me. Maybe that's Rausch's point... I have to think about that.

Good lord, where was I? Talking about Friday? You what, I taught class, had lunch, taught my graduate course in the afternoon, and frankly I have no idea what else happened until I pulled into my driveway and already something was wrong because the front door was just open. My stomach sank when I saw that. Every instinct in me knew that wasn't right. I walked in the front door—which I never do—I always go in through the garage.

There's a foyer and a hallway that goes straight through the house, so from the front door you can see the kitchen's bay window and as soon as I walked in the door, I saw the envelope. Rausch has left it standing upright against an empty vase and my name was printed cleanly across the front of it. Have you ever received a summons—like even for jury duty? I don't know about you, but that moment when someone hands you a summons is just the worst moment. This felt ten times worse. A hundred times worse. You know what? I can't keep going. I'm done. Thinking about that moment... I'm done.

[^4]: The footnotes gave me an idea yesterday. I'll keep writing for Rausch. I'll even match his word counts since I need to string him along and let him think that everything is moving along the way he wants. But I also want to—need to—keep some record of these events for myself. I may need to go back over my own thoughts to see if there is any insight here. I strongly suspect that I can figure out who Rausch is; I just need to really jog my memory. So, I'm going to footnote the text, but I'm not going to turn the footnotes over to Rausch. I'll erase them before I send them along to him. I just need to keep track of my thoughts and plans here.

[^5]: Too precious. I've contacted the police. I contacted them yesterday as a matter of fact. At first they said they couldn't do anything until the missing persons had been gone for at least 72 hours. Enough time has passed that a detective can actually get on this case. His name is Adrian Smythe. He came to visit me in my home and to have a look around. He mentioned that I had I just reported the break in and they would have come right away. Thanks, detective. While I have to say that I expected something more scientific, he really just looked through my belongings. Fair enough. He asked for everything available that I have in my computer and email which I have entirely given over to him. Take the whole thing, Adrian Smythe. Take everything and find this SOB. He asked for pictures of my wife and daughter and that was hard—choosing a picture. I didn't want to choose something sentimental, but rather something that would really help to identify them. I didn't tell Smythe about the drop off, though. It worries me that I'm making a mistake—that attempting to get Rausch myself will result him calling off the whole thing and killing my wife and child. That's the threat and like I said before, writing down now really *is* more horrible than just knowing it.