# Chapter 1

## In which we meet Able and learn of his simple existence in the Shattered Land.

In the far reaches of the Shattered Land, in a delta between the Delphine Meteor rolling along its canyon, and the Silt Sea shifting in undulations of dust, there is a place called the Desert of Idex Mortez. It's a barren gray landscape made up of piles of ancient stone tablets; piled precariously, but as high as buildings in places. The piles lean in all directions as they erode and slowly turn to dust. Upon those millions of stone artifacts are chiseled stories both true and false, philosophies and theories, secrets and myths. They are all discarded writings long forgotten—the languages they were written in no longer known to anyone.

Able lives in Idex Mortez. The piles and piles of ancient texts are dotted by mesas that lord over the vast wasteland. There are giant, fossilized trilobites and silt centipedes; creatures who poorly chose to venture too far into the desert from the Silt Sea. Their transparent exoskeletons are draped across the view where smaller creatures, like silverfish and scurrying six-legged cybernetic bugs, can make a home.

Why so much knowledge and history and law and philosophy had ever been discarded in the middle of a desert is unknown to any in the Shattered Land. The tablets are a mix of cyphers and pictures, many from societies that no longer exist. The scribblings are just representations of change. There is so much dust and shimmering, translucent heatwaves, that the information once stored in these works is blurred and obscured as entropy makes them more and more meaningless.

At night, in the Shattered Land, there are only just a few stars in the night sky and even those have faded to what looks like red smudges. It is very dark at night in the Desert of Idex Mortez. Occasionally some errant trader might ride a silt centipede through the area, looking for schwag or treasure (it is said there are still _books_ in the desert). Those travelers often make the mistake of making camp near a mesa.

The mesas move only at night. And when a mesa stands, ripping its long-settled bulk from its crater, stretching out its spindly, crustacean-like legs, its sudden locution can be heard for miles around like thunder. It is a mystery why the mesas of the Desert of Idex Mortez move at all, but they do, walking for a few hours in the dark of night, lit up by static lightning, only to crash down their entire bulk on a new spot for reasons known only to themselves.

It is difficult to tell a dead mesa from a living one, but not impossible. A dead mesa's legs will close up around it in a tight, spiny fist; like a dried-out spider. Another is the ultrasonic noise that living mesas put out. You cannot hear it, but you can feel it in the ground. There are other ways, other signs, but the first sign is the best guarantee.

Nestled beneath one such dead mesa, there is a rusty shack where a man named Jedediah and his family live. He has a wife, Evo and two sons: Able and Kane. Evo is sick and bedridden in the shack, her body covered in rough blankets and surrounded by pumps and machinations that are keeping her alive. The older brother is a nasty brute; one who decided to turn his discomfort and pain on others. The youngest son is Able.

Every day, Jedediah and his two sons travel out into the desert where they gather the ancient tablets, stacking them on carts and hauling the refuse back to a clearing between the great dead mesa and their homestead. There, they load the tablets onto a brundlex, which scans the tablets and then pushes them along a conveyor belt where they are crushed. Out of the back of the brundlex comes *blackrock*—a fuel that can be sold to the trader caravans and others. With the right technology, blackrock can be used to create small amounts of energy, enough to run other brundlexes. The desert rodents, with their built-in brundlexes thrive on the stuff.

A second substance comes from the process as well, a silver rock known (not by the locals) as chrysoprase; it is exhaust from the brundlex, exhaust from the wildlife. Jedediah keeps the chrysoprase for his younger son Able. The boy has a strange knack for making things with it. It is, without question, a heretical behavior to make the things that Able does. The things... the things-that-move-of-their-own—even the things keeping his wife Evo alive—they are of a spontaneous nature, not of J'onn. One does  make J'onn in the face of J'onn. Movement without soul is to spit in the face of J'onn, but Jedediah is old and tired and loves his wife, so he mostly looks past it. Still, Jedediah is suspicious of his adopted son and believes him to be cursed.

* * *

The desert rodent nearby spews smoke and particles of chrysoprase in an effort to move, but its back legs are shredded from where a tower of tablets has collapsed on it. It squeaks in panic as Able reaches for it. "There, there. You're all right." His words do not calm the creature but it does not defend itself. Able grasps the metallic rat with one hand underneath it's forearms and holds it up in front of his face. Its shining orange eyes beam out and search Able. He can see that its light is fading. "You're going to be all right."

The first thing Able does is press his free thumb to the top of the rat's head. The lights in its eyes go out. He lay the rat on its back and removes a bag of crysoprase and some electrol from his belt. He pours it liberally on the little creature's back legs and then with a sewing motion, works the electrol into the legs where it forms new shafts and ligaments. After ten minutes or so, the rat's back legs are fully formed and he once again holds the rat in front of him, presses his thumb to the rat's head, and the lights in its eyes return.

"There. All fixed!"

The rat, detecting its newfound mobility, squirms in Able's grasp and tries to get free. Able quickly lets it go where it scurries off into a crack between piles of tablets. Able rolls his eyes. "You're welcome."

* * *

Evo lay buried among the hissing bio-brundlexes, in a tattered and gray linen nightgown. In a fever she has pushed all the blankets aside. She wears a mask that covers her nose and mouth and breathes with difficulty. Able stands in the doorway, listening to the hum of the machines that are breathing for her. The tall accordion towers surround her and move asynchronously up and down with tiny huffs and sucking sounds; liquids gush and rush from one tower to another, to a sphere that spins the liquid and dispenses it again.

Though he brought them into existence, he does not know how they function. It is the way of the crysoprase and electrol  that he gives these things a will and a goal—though he knows the goal is unnecessary. As bad as he feels for his mother, he feels bad for the machines that will never know more than to do one thing over and over and over.

The small back room where his mother lay is a miniature city skyline, almost filled with tubes and pipes and dirty glass huddled in around the valley of where her body lay on a small, rotting mattress. A single window, high up on the rickety bedroom wall allows in light, and it is a tea-colored light that pushes through the twin filters of dirt and fingerprints. Outside, gray restless dust whirls and presses at the glass.

Able shifts his weight in the doorway and hears the tired floorboards beneath him creak, like a mourning that is louder than his own. His is lost in confusion. He holds his hands uselessly at his side, then clasps them behind his back. Then, he puts them at his side again—watching as the machines rise and fall, his eyes moving from cylinder to cube as each one reaches a peak, or spins, seems to hold a breath, puffs and then whooshes on again. The room is a small chamber orchestra of gushing flushes, heaving movement, clicks and sighs.

The tired light in the room captures and frames a hundred motes of dust, each in a Brownian dance. Able feels each molecule of pollutant travel up his nose and down his dry throat into his crusted lungs. He closes his eyes and takes a moment to miss her. He travels backwards.

*Lost in memories behind closed eyes now, he turns his head up from the floor, playing with bits of rock, to see her looking at him with that familiar and perplexed look on her face, wondering at the measure of oddity in him. He sits and plays with electrol creations that roll about on the floor, aimless but excited. Then, as always she smiles and pats him on the head, the sun behind her silhouette, yellow and streaming. "You are so special Able. You are one of a kind. I love you."*

Able opens his eyes to the reality of the room, filled with colors like mold, mildew, rot, and he is not sure why he remembers the sunlight ever being golden. Outside dust devils come to rattle the windows and pay their respects with obsidian-eyed sorrow. The land is gray and covered with discarded speeches and arguments, stone artifacts chiseled with letters, all overshadowed by the dead mesa. 

The mesa, lording over the shack, is singular. It dominates the landscape, its massive legs crumpled in the hot sun. For miles around it is the only structure. East, further off from Jedidiah's little valley, sometimes running against the dun-colored sunrises, marred by wavy lines of heat, run the silhouettes of the traders’ centipede caravans; slow, rumbling, and multi-legged.

* * *

Able slips quietly into his room after foraging with his father for the morning. He slides a loop of twine around the door knob and a rusty nail in the wall—a privacy of sorts. Able smiles to himself as he reaches underneath his cot for a secret treasure. He smiles because he knows that not all the ideas in the desert are dead, that not all machines have goals. He has three that are quite alive—he calls them his *mistakes*. They are, all three, small orbs of metal, light and shifting parts. But they are more to him than the machines he’s created to assist his mother, at his father’s command, for these "mistakes" have souls.

When Able has spoken to his Father of machines and things he has made, his Father’s answer is always the same: “This is a valley of men and women who have been outspoken against the True nature of things; who have thought their words history! They have all been wrong! Their petty and unnatural thoughts have come to rest here because ideas cannot outlast the Ungod of Time. All those outspoken against the True Nature of the universe are dead and wrong. They die with their mistakes. And there is no idea ever conceived that does not rest here; in these fields. J'onn is entropy, boy. Entropy is all.”

Able's mistakes roll about the floor, lighting up, whirring and blinking as they bump into the cot and Able and each other. He can hear the sound of his mother’s kind voice, asking him, *What are you dreaming, Able?* Unlike his other creations, these three mistakes were created with no purpose. Instead, when he made them, he tried to imagine what purpose they might want for themselves. 

Po, the littlest of the three wants very little. Po follows Able wherever he goes. Able amuses himself by walking around the room in a circle and watching as Po goes everywhere he does, dodging the other two more rambunctious mistakes, singing a short sweet song of relief when Able sits down and Po can roll up against him and also sit quietly.

Ka and Nip are much more content to explore the room to its edges, sometimes getting into pushing matches with each other when their paths cross. In large part they ignore Able and Po except when Able has gathered the cryoprase to feed them. When Able places his hand down with a small pile of the shiny rock, they quickly roll to him and suck it up with tinks and blips of satisfaction. Able feeds Po separately for this reason; the littlest of the three can’t compete with its siblings when a feeding happens.

After a feeding, all three of his mistakes light up much more, burning with orange and violet and green and pink light that seeps out from between their clockworks and panels. And when he adds electrol to them, they do other things. Ka grows in size. Nip sometimes will throw out an appendage of some kind and spin around it. Po, though, never changes much, except that his insides, between the cracks in his shell, are more dense than the other two.

Able sits with his arms around his knees, Po by his side, cooing, while Ka and Nip duke it out hyperactively, until the afternoon respite is over. Able’s father will call out from the other room, “Boys!” and Able will herd his mistakes into a small burlap sack where they will fuss at first and then calm down, turn their lights down and “sleep” until later in the day when Able can check on them again.

Sitting and watching them after today’s feeding Able is delighted and takes in a sharp breath when Nip does something extraordinarily new. After bumping up against Ka several times, Nip sits still and quivers. Its light fades, and then with a burst of new light Nip is surrounded by two halos and lifts itself off the ground. Able’s eyes stretch wide open as Nip hovers over its sibling Ka, circles around it once or twice teasing, and then flutters back into Able’s hands, as if looking for approval.

Curious, Able holds Nip aloft, even though he is not touching it. There is a force between Able’s hands and Nip’s new rings. The rings around Nip glow and rotate and there is an invisible glass sphere around the mistake now. Able almost shouts out with glee, before looking around in the quiet. Instead, he holds Nip close to his face, a neon green light reflecting, and says, “Nice trick, Nip!”