# Chapter 2

## In which  meet Able and learn of his simple existence in the Shattered Land.

Able dumps an armload of tablets onto the conveyor belt. He watches as the stone relics rumble down towards the brundlex that crush them into chunks and powder, sad that he will never know what they might have said. Suddenly, painfully, he’s awakened from his brief reverie by his brother slamming a cart into his back. “Get moving, blackrock-for-brains.” Able steps aside to let his big brother lift the cart’s contents on to the conveyor belt. He bends down to rub the backs of his ankles. His father, approaching with a cart of his own, shouts out to Able, “If you don’t keep moving in this world, son, it will cause you nothing but pain.”

Rubbing his nose, Able walks away from his father and brother off toward one of the mesa’s legs. He climbs a high pile of tablets to the top and looks south to see if he can see any of the dust clouds kicked up by the traders and their centipedes. Today he sees nothing. Later, after many more armfuls of tablets have been crushed and churned and broken, Able and his brother and father load a large cart with the blackrock. This cart is as tall as Jedediah and requires both Able’s brother and his father to pull it down a long trail to a station where they pile the blackrock in the hopes that traders will come and leave grain or jerky in trade. Able’s father and brother will be gone for several hours on this trip to the station and it is, by far, the best part of the day.

As Jedediah and Able’s brother are preparing to leave with the big cart, Able—without knowing why—says, “Father, I think I could make a brundlex that would pull the cart for you, if you like.”

Jedediah turns to Able, silhouetted against the low gray sky. He removes his large-brimmed black hat and wipes his brow. “No.” Able isn’t sure what to make of the reply. He stands dutifully waiting to be dismissed, looking up at his father, whose eyes are so wrinkled and frowning that Able can barely see his pupils. “We do that for your mother because she is *ill*. We men and you have our health and it is ungodly to use your—“ Able’s father searches for a word, “—your curse when we have our health and can do this work ourselves.”

After a moment, Able’s father squats down to Able's level and says, with more patience, “Ungod forsook this world because men were lazy. Whatever your creations are, Able, you must not use them idly. You should not use them at all... unless you must.” Able’s father puts his heavy, almost stony hand on Able’s shoulder. “You can still be an ungodly man, my son, but to do so you must be humble about what you make.” Able looks to the ground and thinks about the mistakes in his room, hiding beneath his cot.

Back in his room, after his father and brother have left, and after he has checked on his mother, Able sits on the floor among his mistakes. For weeks now, after a feeding, Nip flew about the room. And now, for the last few days, Nip has taken to flying up next to a small window, high in the room. Nip will sit at the window, bumping against the glass, making a light tapping noise. Able, staring up at Nip says, “There’s no where to go, Nip.”

Nip flies several times from the window to Able, but when Able tries to hold the flying mistake, Nip whisks off back to the window. Finally, Nip does what it did the first time, hovering in place and quivering, its light growing brighter and brighter. The light becomes so bright that even little Po comes out from behind Able to look. (Ka is paying no attention whatsoever to his sibling’s seeming tantrum.) Then, with a flash, Nip has sparked a new third halo, and flies across the room opposite the window. In a fury, Nip glows bright green and then shoots across the room, smashing through the window.

Able’s eyes grow wide in horror. “No, no, no, Nip! Nip!” He jumps up and runs to the wall. The window is too high for him to reach. He strains to see if he can make out the mistake anywhere in the sky. It’s bad enough if his father sees the broken window, but more than that, Able’s heart is broken that his little friend has left.

* * *

The broken window was blamed on an errant rock falling off the mesa. Able escaped punishment, which usually consisted of him having to break something he loved. He looked for Nip for days and could find it nowhere. In the mornings, when collecting tablets for his father, Able would circle all the way around the mesa, looking constantly for his little green buzzing mistake. Every night, when the sun set, even though it was dangerous, he snuck outside hoping that the low light would be enough to let him see even a faint green glow. He did not stay out long, the desert was dangerous at night, he knew, but he couldn’t help himself.

Then, one day, after his father and brother had hauled the big cart away, he open the tablet-crushing brundlex and emptied the cryoprase dust inside to feed Po and Ka. Without Nip there to take his share, both Po and Ka had grown in size. Po was still the smallest but Ka had grown very big—so much so he was about the size of Able’s head.

When Able went to feed them, he was ecstatic to open his sack and see that there were once again three mistakes. Po and Ka were there, and now Nip was there, too!—at least he thought it was Nip. The little mistake was half the size of Ka, but no longer a sphere. It had grown a permanent ring around itself and there were small spires growing out of its center. Beneath the spires Nip had what looked like an eye as well.

He knew it was Nip because no sooner were the three mistakes out of the bag then Nip and Ka were at it as usual, bumping each other. Nip rolled inside its new ring but it wasn’t long at all before its three halos appeared and it was off the ground hovering. Nip rushed by Able’s face a few times, even faster than it had been when it had left before. It hovered in front of Able and Able gently put out his hands to hold it. Nip allowed him to do so, but then after a few minutes it began to tug on Able, tugging until Able stood up, and then tugging again to move Able to the wall with the window.

Able found that he could grasp the new thick ring that Nip had grown, using it like a handle. Once he did this, Nip lifted him up off the ground, hauling him up to the window. Able scrambled to get his legs up on the sill and when he did, Nip made the strangest cheering tweet. “Wow, Nip. Neat!” Nip brought itself and Able back to the floor of the room and then made a second noise, what sounded like a warning, and began knocking on the door to the Able's room. Able knew trouble would come if he opened the door, but he couldn't help himself. What did Nip want?

No sooner had Able opened the door than Nip was at the front door of the shack banging on that door, too. Able opened the front door and stepped out with Nip now circling his head. Once more Able grasped the ring around Nip and the little mistake carried Able off the ground and away into the air. Able gasped and tightened his grip as Nip whisked him far above the cabin, around and above the great spiny legs of the dead mesa and then with a loud triumphant chirp, hauled Able all the way up to the top of the mesa where it set him down gently.

Able was ecstatic now, hardly containing himself as he stood on top of the mesa and looked all around at the yellow afternoon sky. He could see so far he didn’t even know what he was looking at. The piles and piles of tablets blended into a beautiful landscape of valleys and paths. To the east he thought he could make out a giant horn of some kind—a horn with more horns—but it was far away and hazy on the horizon. There was something more strange and closer than the canyon. A small plume of smoke rose from what appeared to be a giant beetle with its head buried in the ground. Its legs slowly moved around in the air. Nearby the beetle were a group of small buildings made of hexagons. And there were lights.

* * *

Able sat with Nip on top of the mesa for a long time, marveling at the view. He especially looked to the north where Able could see something he could not even explain. Something in that direction undulated like clouds, but brown, and distinctly separate from the sky.  “I wonder what that is, Nip,” he whispered. He walked in a circle around the top of the mesa and decided to lie down and peer at his own house, hundreds of feet below, but to his horror, the big cart was back. “Oh no! Nip, my father is back.” He reached out to grab Nip by its ring and pulled it close. “Please, Nip, take me back! You have to take me back.” Nip chirped inquisitively. “Please, Nip! Down! Back down!?”

In a panic, Able grabbed Nip with both hands and started to climb down. Nip shrieked and then opened up panels all over its insides, releasing a flash of light, spinning its halos and straining to slow their fall as they scrabbled to the ground. Able’s heart leapt out of his chest in a way that he had never felt before. He had been afraid of his father many times, but that fear was nauseating and creeping; this fear was sudden and took his breath away. Still, Nip did manage to land them both safely and then ripped himself out of Able’s grasp and flew to Able’s face releasing a stream of clicks, chirps and shrieks as if scolding Able, but Able couldn’t pay any attention.

Running around the side of the cabin, then inside and straight to his room, he found the door open wide and his brother crouched over Ka with a chunk of blackrock in his hand that he was beating Ka with. Ka moaned and had dents and cracks and wasn't to be able to roll away while Able’s brother bashed it again with the stone. Po hid under the bed moaning. “No!” Able roared. Without thinking about anything he grabbed the upraised arm of his brother and threw his entire weight on him, causing the both of them to roll over each other on the floor. 

Kane quickly managed to get Able in a headlock. "What is it, Able? Is it yours?" Able struggled to get free and with ferocity, Nip flew into Kane's face and chirped and squeaked and buzzed. "C'mon, Able, what are these things? Did you use your curse? How do they work?" With Able tucked under one arm, Kane picked up the blackrock and threw it at Ka, laughing.

“No!” Able yelled, having lost all sense of thought, his vision having gone red. "Please! Stop!"

Nip flew to the other side of the room and turning red, flew straight into Kane's head, bashing him hard and causing him to scream and fall, dragging Able on top of himself. "Nip! No!" Able shouted.

Jedidiah came storming into the room on hearing the commotion and saw his one son bleeding and the other waving maniacally at some mystery... thing. He shouted, "The Ungod forsakes us!” He grabbed Able by his neck and hauled him up into the air off his now unconscious brother. “What heresy is this?” he shouted at Able as he pointed to the mistakes. Nip, hovering near Ka, touched its fellow mistake gently and then turned a bright red color and flew in a flash at Jedediah’s face, crackling with bolts of energy. Shocked, Jedediah dropped Able roughly to the ground to swat at Nip who shocked him every time the old man’s stony hands struck him.

Able scrambled to grab his bag and Po and Ka, slipping them both in it and ran for the door past his father still contending with the enraged Nip. As Able ran through the main room to the door, Nip changed from red to orange and slowly hovered away from Jedediah, who stalked the mistake as it floated away, keeping his distance. “This is vile, Able! This is evil! I warned you about your curse and you ignored me!”

Able stood in the main door of the house. From there he could see that his mother had sat up and was staring back and forth from him to Nip to Jedediah. "Mother," was all he could utter as began backing outside and Nip zipped between him and as his father making a cacophony. Jedediah, looming taller than ever and fuming, yelled, “You are a curse on this house! Your mother's heart was too big! You are no son of mine! Get out! Get out of this house, get out of my valley! Never return!”