# Chapter 3

## In which Able wanders the Desert Idex Mortez with Po, Ka and Nip

With no direction to follow other than his father’s outstretched index finger, vaguely indicating to him to leave the valley, Able headed toward the upside down beetle, with its mysterious half-buried hives, and much further off, unknown to him, the Silt Sea. At the bottom of the hill between his Father's cabin and the tablet-crushing brundlex, he quickly grabbed a sack and filled it with as much electrol as he could find.

Able scrambled over piles of tablets with the sack of electrol and Po and Ka stowed in their bag, and Nip flitting about his head, just ahead of him. He inched his way through small paths that had been cleared over many years by his family and others who mined the tablets. After several hours of this, and as it was growing dark, he came to a depression, a crater in the tablets. Instinctively, he knew this to be the former resting place of one of the mesa's. It's size alone indicated a massive former presence.

It was then that Able realized the full scope of his problems. He was alone, at night, when the Mesas traveled (crushing other animals underfoot). He did not know where he was going. He turned to the only thing he had: the sack of electrol. So, he might as well feed his mistakes. He scrabbled to the bottom of the crater and sat on the ground with his back resting against a stack of tablets, looking out across more open ground than he'd ever seen. Even all around his father's house, there were paths, small clearings and small canyons. But this was a circle of ground many more times larger that the footprint of his Father's house.

And then Able realized that of all his difficulties ahead, he wasn't sure if he should ever see his mother again. Of all his troubles, this one seemed very far from a solution. 

He released Po and Ka from their burlap sack. As usual, Po quickly retrelectroled to Able's backside and seemed to hide behind him. Poor Ka, though, was in bad shape. It had gashes in its side that seemed to be leaking a vermillion dust. Nip was high above the crater, about in its center, hovering. When Able looked up, Nip was the brightest thing in the night sky. There were few stars to be seen, not that Able knew what they were. Maybe they were siblings of Nip?

He attended to Ka first, taking a handful of electrol from his sack and pouring it on and around Ka, who seemed to swell up a tad and then sigh, and then shutter. As it did, Ka retracted in size a bit, but also the gashes disappeared from its surface. Ka brightened a bit in color also. "Feeling better, then?" Able asked, and Ka spun in a circle and chirped. "At least one of us is doing all right." He reached out and pet Ka, who reacted in no particular way, just rolling in angled circles, appearing to enjoy his renewed smooth surface.

Able turned with a handful of electrol that he held out to Po, behind him, and hiding underneath a tablet outcropping. It took Po a minute, but he gradually rolled out and partook of the meal. It did not seem to matter how much Po ate; he never got any larger, like Ka, and he never transformed in any way like Nip. In many ways, all three had started out the same, swirling dustballs. Po had gained more solidity, but other than that, had not changed in size at all. "My father said I was a runt. Are you a runt?" Po growled.

Finally Able turned a handful of dust to the sky, looking up at Nip, shining in a green-to-yellow and back again pattern. Nip made no noise, no move closer. Ka was bright enough that it never really got dark at the bottom of the crater, and Able curled up at the bottom of the ridge and slept, hoping that Mesas did not come to rest at the same place twice... often.

* * *

Able was rapidly approaching the upside down beetle. The wind rushed by him. The world moved by at such a fast pace, he couldn't see every detail he wanted to; there was so much to the world. That morning he had awoken with Po and Ka close by his side and Nip, back down from his vigil, scrounging around in the electrol bag. Able tried to drag him out of the bag just to make sure that he wouldn't eat all of it, but Nip was too heavy. Instead, Able pulled the bag off of Nip, revealing an almost swollen mistake. Where the center of Nip had been a sphere, it now pulsed, flat hexagonal surfaces, mashed up against one another, then shifting again into points—horns almost.

Able shooed Po and Ka (who were cautiously rolling in a perimeter around Nip) back into their bag. He picked up his other bag as well, and then began to make his way to the opposite side of the crater. But when it became obvious that Nip was not following, Able turned and walked back to him. "Are you sick? Did you eat too much?"

Able tried to push Nip with his shoe, but the mistake wouldn't move. "I'm not leaving without you. You need to come along." After a moment, "You don't *look* sick." He reached out to grab Nip's outer ring, hoping to be able to drag the little mistake, and much to his surprise, it was slightly warm and quite moveable. He grasped the outer ring and lifted it up, and with a loud *brrraaaat*, the center ring and then the core of Nip rose up from the ground as if pulled by puppet strings until they were in line with the outer ring. Nip's core spun wildly, vacillating from a smooth sphere to a pointed dodecahedron while making a *phbbbbbbbt* sound.

"Sorry," Able said, and shrugged. "I didn't think I could move you."

Nip's core spun even more wildly, shimmering like a rainbow through one color after another. It grew brighter, too, with an increased humming. The ring begin to pull up on Able's hand and lifted his arm up over his shoulder. Able hung on, but wasn't sure he should. "We tried this before, Nip! I don't think it's a good idea."

The core spun until it was bright white, the humming turning into a melodic chord, then a flash, and then two metallic ribbons burst out from the core and dropped down to wrap around Able's waist and behind his legs. The tones that Nip was emitting grew louder and higher, as Nip began to lift Able off the ground. As Nip beamed and sounded out, Able found himself sitting comfortably in a swing seat made of the metallic ribbons. Then, Nip's music ceased, and light burst out of it, returning it to a bright green shimmering. Its core took the form of a flattened dodecahedron, and the sound returned to a low hum. Before Able knew it, they were above the crater and racing off toward the upside-down beetle.

* * *

As opposed to when they practically fell off the dead mesa the night before, this landing was quite nice. Nip brought Able gently to the ground about ten feet away from the beetle with its head stuck in the ground. Only now, it didn't look so much like a beetle. For one, it was very tall. It's legs looked more like thumbs, and they didn't squirm about the way a desperate beetle's legs might. They pushed gently through the air, alternating back and forth,  each one with a fan embedded in each end. Nip retracted its ribbons and hovered in place. Able reached up and patted him, "Thanks, Nip. That might've taken us days to walk."

They had landed on top of a hill, and from where they were, Able could see new things. For one, he could see the dead mesa near his father's house, smaller now than he had ever seen it. Knowing he could travel faster with the help of Nip, he felt less upset about being away from home and his mother. Maybe his father would calm down. He could go back later.

Looking, down the hill, away from his home, he saw the structures that looked like hives buried in the ground. They were covered in hexagonal windows, almost the whole of them being dark glass. And then, not too far from those, he could see a figure digging in the ground. *Well*, Able thought, *I guess I could ask where I am*.