# Chapter 5

## In which Able finds Gef and the Caravan and Delphine.

As they flew through the air again, Able comfortable in Nip's seat, he could think of little else but his mother's eyes. He missed her desperately. In his lap, sat his sack with both Ka and Po and now a great deal of sweetbread and something from the plants that Ghendra called fruit and vegetables. She said he could use them for trade for things he might need. He was glad to have it, glad to have met Ghendra, but he was also sad and scared. Never in his life had he known so little about what would come next.

In a way, he supposed, he had never known what would come next. Days only seemed to repeat themselves without much change. But now, having lost his mother, having seen his mistakes do amazing things right before his eyes, having met Ghendra and seen new colors... now, it seemed like his life was changing daily. There was wonder in it that he liked. But then there was no knowing what would come next.

In the distance, he spotted a massive crack across the land. Before it, the tablets of Idex Mortez spilled over each other, but the piles of ancient written language grew shorter and shorter in height until there was just barren ground. Past that, there was the crack—a huge wound in the ground that was wide and dark and seemed to stretch from one end of the horizon to the other. Then, between the diminishing piles of the tablets and the crack, he saw a mass of movement. He could see beige tents, and people moving about them, and massive creatures of a kind he had never seen or heard of before. They were long and made of sections and had many, many legs.

Able, looked up. "Nip, don't get too close. Let's just land nearby." Nip chirped a gleeful reply and flew lower to the ground, whisking them over the hills and hills of tablets until they came near the edge, where Nip set them down.

"Now, Ghendra said to keep you all hidden, so I need you to hide, okay, Nip."

Nip buzzed with some annoyance, but then sucked up the ribbons into its ring of light, and then sucked the light into its center. Nip turned a dull, metallic orange and dropped out of the sky onto the ground with a thud. It made a sound like a huff. "Well, all right," said Able. Nip was now just a dodecahedron and Able rolled him into the sack with Po and Ka who chirped different greetings. Nip made a farting sound.

Able hefted the whole, now *very* heavy sack onto his back and set off in the direction of the caravan. It amazed Able how quickly he had become used to the idea of flight. One day he had no idea that such a thing was even possible. Then another day he was breathless and amazed that it was. And now, he hated walking and carrying heavy stuff.

When he arrived at the caravan, people were pulling down the tents and tending to the massive creatures in their midsts. The creatures had looked so small from the air, but now Able could see that they were many times his own height, and bigger and longer than even his father's house. Most people gave him very strange looks and pointed at him. Sometimes when he asked them about a man named Gef, they would say nothing and turn away. Able felt a very odd feeling. It wasn't quite fear; something like it but more creeping. Finally, though, one man, looking him up and down, shrugged and pointed at another man who was tying bags to one of the creatures. "Thank you," said Able to no reply.

The man Gef was dressed in heavy robes and was wearing a mask with glass eyes and a large-brimmed hat. When Able got over to the man named Gef, Able forgot himself and said instead, "What is that?"

The man paused and turned toward Able with some curiosity. "What is what?"

"Um... your animal."

"Have you never seen a centipede before?"

Able silently shook his head. The man scratched his head underneath his wide-brimmed hat. "Well," he said, "It's a centipede." Able nodded.

"You're a pretty far ways off from anywhere, kid."

"Oh. Well, I'm looking for a man named Gef."

"Ok. Well, that'd be me." He stared down at Able from behind his mask. "And you are?"

"Ghendra sent me."

"Ghendra, huh?" The man turned and tightened some straps on the bags on the centipede. "Okay."

"She said that you were looking for a—um—a cyclo..."

"The Cyclopedia?"

"Yes. She said I could help you find it."

"She said that, huh? Now did she mean that you *want* to help me or that you *could* help me?"

Able thought. "Um... she said I *could* help you. And she said that in exchange you could help me past Delphine's run."

"Really? So you know something about the Cyclo?"

"No."

Gef chuckled. "Wonder what that old bat is up to?"

Able thought on it. "She's growing plants."

Gef laughed louder. "Yeah, we all know that. Won't trade seeds for nothin', so what of it? What do you got in that sack?"

"Fruitsandvegetables."

"Fruits and vegetables."

"Yes."

"No, kid. They're two different things. There's fruit, and then there's vegetables."

Able stared blankly.

"Well, you're the only one around here who's got any of that, so that's something."

"Okay," Able said.

"You got a name?"

"Able Summary."

Gef furrowed his brow. "That's a weird name, kid."

"Is it?"

"Yeah."

The pair just stared at one another for a moment.

Gef squatted down to be on Able's level. He looked around the crowd and pulled his mask up. His face was much like Able's! "You are a curious thing, little man."

Able just stared.

"Where did you come from again?"

"The Desert Idex Mortex."

"Sure. I doubt that."

"I did! My mother..." Able paused and looked down, then continued, "My mother and Father lived out there and farmed."

"Your mother and father?" Asked Gef. "You have a mother and father?"

"Yes."

"And are they like you? Like me?"

"What do you mean?"

Gef scratched his head again. "Did they drink water?"

"Yes."

"But see, you and I don't."

"I know."

"Okay. Huh. Mother and father, huh? Well, if you don't know nothin' about the Cyclo, I don't know how she thinks you could help. But then who knows what she had in mind—probably something. She knows things."

"She showed me lots of books."

"Is that right?" Gef paused.

Able panicked, and did something he did not like, he lied. He thought of Po, and said, "I've memorized all of them."

Gef looked at his mount for a moment and then turned to Able again. "Well, you don't weigh much, so I suppose it's not too much trouble. Get yourself up on my pede and find a place to secure that sack of yours. We're getting out of here pretty quick. The Delphine's coming soon."

* * *

The bridge across the chasm was long, thin, and badly built. Mostly it was constructed of steel wires shot across the crack with massive crossbows. Everything on top of that had been knitted with steel cable. The trader's camp had entirely disappeared; now there was just a traffic jam of centipedes waiting to cross the rickety steel-sewn bridge one at a time. The riders shouted at one another about their place in line. From what Able could tell some people had more reason to cross than others. At times there were families onboard of massive insects and yet the order of the crossing was only respected in that it should be one at a time.

With not that many pedes in front of them, Gef called back to Able (barely hanging on to the chitin of the monster) that "We'll get to the other side soon! Until then, hang on tight to Arthra."

"What's an Arthra?" Able yelled back.

"You're sitting on her!"

And then, the order broke apart. Someone riding something other than a pede—a kind of steam effusing mini-mesa—came racing down the edge of the chasm, screaming, "Delphine's coming!" The world seemed to lurch as every driver of every pede now rushed the bridge and began crossing without waiting, the entirety of the bridge beginning to vibrate and undulate with the thousand legs of tens of different centipedes. Gef somehow convinced Arthra to muscle onto the bridge ahead of many other riders. Able noticed she was one of the larger pedes and seemed to be carrying much less.

He looked all about the confusion to try to figure out what was going on. He couldn't see Gef's face while sitting behind him, but he could see panic in the face of the driver behind them. He wanted to grab on to Nip and fly, but the words of Ghendra kept in his head. *Do not reveal them too soon. You'll know when*.

Then Able began to see changes in the light all around. The whole time he had been with Gef and waited in line for the bridge, the light was normal just like at home. There were clouds in the sky, and from them light. Now, a shadow had overtaken the horizon. It was different. The shadow was like a new horizon. It was moving, stretching out from one end of the chasm and reaching towards the riders and the bridge. He could see shadows down in the chasm changing, lengthening.

He could feel the shadow in the center of his body, so much so that he even thought he could hear it. He looked towards the source of the dark at the end of the chasm and saw what looked like a sandstorm, only it was getting taller, and unlike a sandstorm, it was curved. A sandstorm would have been drawn across the horizon like a line, but this was like the edge of circle, and growing.

Gef, in the meantime, with Arthra maybe an eighth of the way across the bridge, began to laugh. "If you wanted to ride with me, son, you picked an amazing day to do it!" The centipede wound its hundred legs out over the steel knitting, each leg sticking to the cables with massive fibers.

Beyond the bridge, far down the chasm, a dark arc continued to reveal itself. Able could see that it was like a sandstorm, dust and clouds broiling around a dark center. Shouts across the caravan went up, "Delphine!"

The massive body rolled slowly and crushed everything in its path, smashing the sides of the chasm, tearing massive pieces off as it went. The sound Able had only thought he could detect earlier began to truly vibrate his insides and soon there was no question he could hear it. He could hear little else, only Gef shouting at the top of his lungs, "Move, move, move!" There was death in it, and he had not felt fear quite this intense—or at least only in the last few days. This was even more fearsome.

They neared the far side of the bridge and Able could begin to see much more of the outline of the the giant rock, the meteor. He could see its pock-marked surface rolling slowly over from top to bottom, huge boulders being thrust off of it and the edge of the canyon, landing with explosions hundreds of kilometers off. Surrounding the edge of the massive object was a twisting ebony nightmare of roiling, twisting clouds. Some of the debris even flew at the bridge down into the chasm or up over their heads. The air was growing thick with dust. The light from the sky was disappearing.

"C'mon, Arthra! C'mon!" The centipede zigged and zagged across the steel cables. Gef had bent way low over her and Able did the same, clinging to the insect's armor and jostling all about, sometimes so much he couldn't make out the shape of anything at all. Past Gef and over Arthra he could see the other side of the chasm, but he had no idea how near they were.

Would this not be the time to use the mistakes? But how in the world could Po, Ka and Nip even manage to deal with this massive beast? And even though Able had only known Gef and Athra for maybe an hour, he couldn't imagine leaving them behind for some reason. Something inside him felt attached to Gef. Gef's questions had raised questions in Able. There seemed to be so much to discover. Able wouldn't abandon them and fly. He hunkered down and dared to gaze again in the direction of Delphine.

With the rock blocking out so much of the sky, so close Able thought he could reach it, with the noise so loud, it drowned out everything, the dust so thick Able couldn't see the riders behind them, Arthra's shape changed. Suddenly, she was not rippling from one end to the other or side to side. Had they reached the other side? Dust was everywhere.

Another few minutes and the centipede was climbing up out of the dust cloud, up at a steep angle. Able had been worried about sliding off the side of the creature, no he was worried about rolling backwards as the centipede climbed and the dust began to dissipate. Able felt a rise in his belly as the centipede crested a mesa and began to slow. "Woo!" Shouted Gef and he slapped Arthra hard on her armor.

The centipede slowed to a crawl and began to turn to so that Able could look out and see the top of Delphine moving through the chasm, leaving a massive, long deluge of smoke and rubble. Able couldn't make out the bridge. From where he sat, he could see other riders on other peaks. He could see some emerging up from the dark torrent, dust streaming off of them.