# Chapter 8

## In which the crew explores a temple.

Able and Gef sat up in the mud. Nip and Po were covered in it. They all looked around the pitch-black place they were in. Gef had figured that if they found a door, they would find a tunnel and he had traded for some argon light-sticks. He turned two of them on and handed one to Able. Even with the two bright purple lights, it was hard to make out too much of the chamber. Gef looked up at the ceiling, toward the hole that had formed beneath them. Ka'Rolly was peering in.

"We better stick together. C'mon down Ka'Rolly."

Ka'Rolly shook its head. Gef looked to Able, who then said, "It's fine Ka'Rolly. We're safe. Come down. Besides, there's smoketigers up there."

Ka'Rolly let out a loud indecisive sound. It neither wanted to go down nor face the tigers. After a minute, Ka'Rolly floated down through the hole, his scarecrow-like body hanging and lightly swinging from Ka. and peered about. A small floodlight grew in the eye of the makeshift face and began shining about the chamber. Ka'Rolly let out a low whistle.

From what they could see, the chamber wa filled with debris that was covered in soft, green moss. From everywhere on the ceiling, long stone stalactites dripped water. There were many pillars still standing at the edge of the chamber, tens of meters wide and circular. Gef walked the perimeter of the room and found two doors.

Able made his own discovery. There was electrol everywhere! There was even floating electrol clusters in the air—floating about like fireflies! He reached out his hand and caught one of the floating clusters of the stuff. It glowed bright in his hand. He got out a sack and began gathering as much of it as he could sort out. It was in the mud, the water, on the moss and in the air. To Able the whole chamber sparkled. Gef walked over to him and watched as the little synthezoid put dirt into a bag. "What are you collecting?"

"Electrol."

"Um, yeah. That's not a thing."

"Sure it is." Able held up a handful of the stuff. See?"

"No. I don't. That looks like dirt to me."

Able looked disappointed. "That's what my father always said."

Gef studied Able. "You must have some kind of sensory apparatus that I don't."

Able looked up, perplexed.

Gef squatted down and explained. "It's how we 'zoids detect things. It's how we see. It's how we hear. It's how we know which way is up and how we know where our bodies are when we're not looking at them."

"Oh." Able said.

"It's something you should know Able. Everyone see the world differently. And what we see... well, that's not really the world."

Able looked very confused and Gef chuckled. "Forget that last part. My point is, *you* can see something that no one else can."

"Ghendra could see it."

"Is that right?" Gef said, not surprised.

"She had a metal tube that she used."

"Yeah. She knew what she was doing all right."

Able looked at the cluster of electrol in his hand and walked over to Ka'Rolly. "Here," he said, "Use this."

Ka'Rolly sucked it up into a vent behind its fake face and then began to shake and glow very bright. Tendrils began growing out from the bottom of the orb that was Ka. They laced themselves through the skeletal structure of the faux body that Gef had constructed and attached themselves at various points. Ka'Rolly set himself on the ground and began walking around, flailing its arms in the air and making hooting noises.

Gef put his head in hands. "Good Gaia, I've had about enough of your magic, Able."

Able smiled brightly in the purple light. Magic. He liked that word.

* * *

Able used the electrol to continue to fix Nip and Po. Nip had been sitting in the mud sputtering. He was smooth and whole again but he couldn't fly. Po looked the same as usual but he seemed exhausted. After consuming the clusters of electrol, both were back to their more recent selves.

The crew decided to head through the door that lead in the general direction of Horn. Able desperately wanted to know what was behind the other door, but Gef didn't want them to get lost. He had to promise Able that they would come back later just to get him to drop it.

One chamber lead to another which lead to another. There was writing all over much of the walls. Able recognized some of it from the tablets of the Idex Mortex but couldn't read it. Gef also recognized some it and could make out a few symbols. They tried to let Po read it too with no luck.

"How come no one can see the meaning in these symbols? My mother could."

"What? Your mother could read?" Gef saw immediately that Able didn't understand. "Read means finding meaning in the symbols."

"Oh. Then yes. My mother could read. She would read *to* me!"

"Huh. Well, most people can't read these symbols because they're so old. They're really, really old. And the people that wrote them aren't around anymore. At least... your mother could read this stuff? The tablets?"

"She wouldn't read me the tablets. She could read them, but she would read me other stuff. Nice stories."

"I wonder how old you are?"

"I'm nine."

"You just know that?"

"Yes."

"Do you remember your first day?"

"Yes. I woke up and my mother was smiling at me. She seemed very happy."

"Hold on to that. Memories fade with time. I wish I could remember my first day. Or I wish I'd thought to write it down."

Again, Able looked confused and Gef smiled. "Writing is the opposite of reading." Gef scraped a horizontal line into a blank part of the wall. The ancient stone crumbled easily. "See that symbol? That means the number one."

Able nodded and Gef continued, drawing another longer line beneath that one. "And if I write this, that means the number two."

"But if you can write that, why not read this stuff?" Able gestured to the wall of symbols.

"There's hundreds of ways and things to write Able. Really, there's an infinite number."

"In-fi-nint?"

Gef drew a twisted loop on the wall.

<div class="symbol">
/images/infinity-symbol-1in.png 
</div>

"It means uncountable."

Able stared at the symbol for a long time and thought about things he could not count.

"C'mon. We've got to keep moving."

* * *

After making their way through chamber after chamber, and coming around in circles more than a few times, the crew comes to an enormous set of iron double doors. On each side of the doors are giant stone pots. Gef examines the door and the symbols on it. "I can't read most of this, but this one is 'trees'." He points it out to Able.

Gef tries to pull on the doors, but to no end. They are shut—maybe locked—tight. Gef looks around for something he could use as a lever but there's nothing. Gef bows to Able, "Well, use magic then."

Able has no ideas, but then Ka'Rolly steps forward and grabs Nip with his newfound arms. He makes a long string of sounds and Nip waits until Ka'Rolly is through. Then, Nip makes a "bonk" sound and grows out its ring and begins hovering and pulling away from the door. Ka'Rolly grasps one of the handles and squats down as Nip turns bright orange and pulls. Ka'Rolly's new feet dig into the stone floor and it leans back with all its might.

A teeth-gritting scraping sound comes from the door as it slowly begins to give. Nip glows brighter and lets out a squeal. Ka' Rolly bends down even more and leans back further and then the door bursts open with a cloud of dust and both of the mistakes go rolling backwards into the room.

"Yes!" shouts Gef.

"Yay!" shouts Able. "Way to go, you guys!"

Ka'Rolly pick himself up off the ground. Rolly is doing somersaults and Ka makes a little tune. Ka'Rolly adjusts its cloak and then holds its arms up in a pose of strength.

"No kidding," says Gef. "Wow!"

A strange light is emitting from the chamber and as soon as the crew begins to enter, they can see why. They are standing at the top of a large staircase that descends to the left and right. Out of the center of the landing they are on, below, a torrent of water flows out and across the massive chamber in front of them in a canal. The ceiling of the chamber is filled with large holes, and out of those holes hangs giant mirrors. Daylight streams down through the holes and hits the mirrors, creating beams of light that criss-cross the chamber and land on massive stone pots. And growing from each pot, each one unique, a tree.

Able whispers, "It's like Ghendra's house but bigger."

"Yeah, way bigger." Whispers Gef.

The giant quiet space seems to enforce the quiet with awe. None of the crew wants to disturb what is clearly a very holy place. Carefully, they make their way down the curving staircase to the lowest level of the chamber. The pots for the trees are tens of meters in diameter, and several times Gef's height, taller than all the buildings Ables has ever seen. Up from each pot, all the way to the ceiling, extends an enormous glass tube. The trees themselves, inside the tubes, vanish into the ceiling of the chamber, which aside from the columns of sunlight that shine on them, is shrouded in shadows. The crew stops in front of the first of the massive pots. There is a large metal box with an assortment of controls; levers, knobs, switches, screens, buttons. Over the control panel is a sign that reads, "Cedrus atlantica." Gef notes that the word is in a modern tongue that he can read.

The machine with the controls is whirring away, lights blinking, one screen showing a perfectly normal sine curve, waving back and forth smoothly. "This may have been ancient once, Able," Gef says quietly, "but I think someone's been here quite recently."

Po, hanging out in Able's belt in a pouch, makes an excited beeping. Able pulls him out of the pouch and Po shines a laser on the control panel. "Okay," says Able. He sets Po down on the control panel and Po extends its legs and crawls to the top.

"Be careful, Po," says Gef. "Don't turn it off."

Po pauses and makes a sound like, "Duh."

"Oh, well, excuse me," says Gef.

Po extends a new fourth sort of leg. It changes in shape until it matches a hole in the control panel and then Po lowers itself until the new appendage slides into the control panel. Po begins chirping away, lights dancing all over his little frame. He forms light model of the tree over himself. Then the light model becomes surrounded by charts and graphs and equations.

Gef has wandered off to the next tree; this one says, "Cedrus brevifolia." He walks to a third pot where the sign reads, "Cedrus deodara." He makes his way back to the first pot. "I think it's an ark."

"Oh!" Able says a bit too loudly. He covers his mouth and then whispers again, "I know what an ark is."

"You do?"

"Yes. It was one of the stories my mother used to tell me."

"How did your version go?"

"My version?"

"Well, I've heard and read stories like that many times. There's a Nomish version and and Illith version, a Kravath version, on and on."

Able didn't know what these "versions" were, so he continued, "There once was a really big flood, which Jupaeter made, which is when water covers *everything* and Gaia didn't want all the animals to die, so she asked a noman named Nemo to build a really big box and put as many animals as he could in it. And then the box floated for a really long time and when the flood went away, all the animals were safe. The big box was called an ark."

"Yup. That's what I think this is. An ark for trees."

"Trees," Able repeated.

"Yeah. I've only heard of them in the Cyclopedia. I've never seen one."

"A they like Ghendra's plants. Do they grow and make more of themselves?"

"Yup."

"Why not let them grow outside?"

"They would die. The air is wrong. I'm pretty sure that's what these big tubes are doing; keeping the air right for them."

"Oh." Able said and once again craned his neck back toward the top of the huge cedar. It must have been two meters thick. "They're pretty."

Po clicked and removed itself from the control panel. "You done?" Gef said and Po bleeped in response. "Okay then. We need to move on. Let's remember, we're here for a reason."

Ka'Rolly giggled. Rolly swam in a circle as if chasing his tail.

Gef replied, "I don't know what you mean, but if you're saying this is reason enough, you're not wrong."

The group made their way to the edge of the chamber. Gef said it would be better to follow the wall to not get lost. They passed other staircases with signs that Gef could pronounce but didn't know: "Betulaceae" and "Cuoressaceae." As they passed each one, Po would shine out a new tree light model. Gef looked at it at one point and said "Show off." Po made a phbbbt sound.

* * *

The crew made their way through chamber after chamber, walking for hours. Not all of the trees were so big. Some were small and covered in flowers that were pink and red and purple. Able could not get enough of the colors. Gef had to practically drag him along to keep him from stopping at every single terrarium.

But then they came to a chamber that had no more doors; only a large arch over the canal. On each side of the canal were large walkways with metal guardrails. "I guess we go this way," said Gef. He knew they were still traveling in the direction of the city—in fact they should be nearly underneath it at this point.

The followed the canal into darkness and lit their argon lamps again, leaving the columns of daylight and trees behind them. There was nothing know bu the purple glow from their lamps dancing on the flowing water, and the sound of it drifting along through the stone tunnel.

After more hours, the tunnel gave way to massive chamber—even more massive than the ones containing the tree—that was just a reservoir, a giant underground lake. The chamber was dark and they could only see out into the lake maybe fifty meters. The walkway continued along the edge of the lake until they came to a metal door, shut with a large wheel in its center. Gef gave the wheel a try and it gave easily. "Well oiled," he said. The door opened to a set of metal spiral stairs. Gef shown his lamp inside the room with the stairs and then looked back to the crew. "I guess we go up."