# Chapter 10

## In which the Baron assists the crew.

The Baron's people showed the crew to a large bedroom chamber with large windows overlooking the city, the room filled with all manner of beautifully crafted furniture. The crew settled in, Nip flying as high as he could to the curved ceiling; Able found a large, soft chair; Po joined him in it; Ka'Rolly laid down on a bed for the first time and let out a long whistle; while Gef just paced.

Able spoke first, "I don't like him at all."

Gef replied, "I know, I know, He's off-putting. But he's willing to bargain. Maybe there's something we could come up with that he wants."

"Do you think he has the Texo Compass for the Ultracircus?"

"No."

"What makes you think that?"

"We weren't telling him things we didn't know. I think he was not telling us things he didn't know. But he knows *about* the Ultracircus. He even mentioned people that were part of it, 'doddering, old fools.' What was that about?"

"What is the nanosphere?"

"Yeah. I have no idea."

Gef looked at Po. "But we do have access to his library. What do you say, Po, want to do some reading?"

Po chirped a song of excitement.

"I thought so."

"What should I do?" Asked Able.

"I think we're gonna' need a fast exit at some point. I need you and Nip to scout around and see if you can find a quick way out of the city—not the way we came in."

"Why not leave the way we came?"

"I think that museum belongs to the Baron. He may be able to lock it down. He definitely keeps his own people from getting down there."

"I don't like that he has all that water and food and yet the people of the city are begging for it."

"You're right; it's wrong. But we have to stay focused on what we're here to do. We need the Texo compass."

"Gef, why have you decided it's so important to do that? You used to think that the Ultracircus was a myth."

Gef stopped his pacing and came to stand in front of Able. "Able, you are incredibly important. I have seen you do things that I haven't heard about in history texts. Whoever is at the Ultracicus, Ghendra knew they could help you or help you use this special sight of yours. We need to get you to them. Maybe I'm just being silly, but some part of me thinks that the balance of this world could be at stake."

"Geez, Gef."

Gef chuckled. "I know, buddy. But look, if there were more Nips and Kas and Pos in the world, don't you think they could help people?" Gef paused in thought. "Come to think of it, why haven't you made more of them?"

"Well... I made them, yes, but in order to do it, there's part that I need. My mother gave me three of them. They're the only three I have."

"What kind of part are we talking about?"

Able searched the ceiling for an answer and his eyes landed on Nip. He looked back to Gef and shrugged, "Cubes."

"Well, that helps."

Able smiled sheepishly.

"Well hey, this is the kind of thing we can find out about at the library maybe. Let's not waste any time. You and Nip scout and me and Po will go learn some stuff."

Able looked to Ka'Rolly on the bed. "What about Ka'Rolly."

Gef smiled. "I think Ka'Rolly should investigate the bed."

Ka'Rolly let out another long whistle of pleasure.

* * *

Able and Nip made there way out of the bed chamber and around long corridors through the palace, meandering until they found a guarded door. Two the mechanomen stood in front of it, large metal halberds clasped in their hands, the shafts resting on the ground. Able tried saying hello and good morning and that they would like to go to the market, but the metal men didn't move and didn't speak a word. Nip floated up to one of their helmets and peered inside. The glassy eyes peering out of the slot in the metal helmet never moved.

Just then, the Baron appeared from around a corner. "Hello, my little friends. Can I be of help?"

"Uh. We would like to go to the market."

"I see. Well, of course. Please, allow me to accompany you."

Albe pondered this. It would be hard to scout with the Baron there, but he definitely didn't want to seem suspicious.

"Um. Okay."

"Excellent. Let's have a look around shall we?"

* * *

Gef and Po found the double doors to the library easily enough but they were unfortunately locked. "Sure," Gef said, imitating the Baron, "have my library at your disposal." He looked down at Po in his hand. "Don't suppose you can pick locks?" Po made a disappointed tone.

Just as Gef was about to turn and leave, he could hear the loud clanking of the big lock on the door, and then one of them opened. The Baron was standing there. "Ah! You have decided to investigate the library. Excellent. I am very proud of my collection. Please let me be of assistance."

Of course the Baron wasn't going to let him in unaccompanied, Gef thought. Still though it was better than nothing. Gef put back on his airs of being a scientist and said to the Baron, "I generally keep my knowledge in a more compact fashion, but I do love the smell of books."

"A more compact fashion, you say," said the Baron as he shut the door behind them.

* * *

Ka'Rolly lay on the bed enjoying an amazement sense of comfort, the first they had ever enjoyed. Even burrowing through the wet mud, though familiar and safe, was not nearly as comfortable. Rolly adored the sense of lightness she had gained from being suspended in nothing but water, and she adored all the things to see. And Ka was able to show her what the feeling of walking was like and strength! Ka enjoyed being treated like a person, of sorts.

They were staring at the ceiling and just enjoying the sensation of floating when a face came into their line of site.  It was the Baron. "Hello, my unusual friend. Are you enjoying the accouterments?"

Ka'Rolly nodded hesitantly.

* * *

Gef, with Po in hand, ran his index finger along the rows of books looking for something familiar. There appeared to be many languages making up the titles. He couldn't discern what order they were in either. He thought maybe a ruse would help him. "It's interesting to me that you keep copies of these books. I destroy the ones I encounter."

"Really? But whatever for? And how do you reference them later?"

Gef looked at the Baron, "I memorize them." He held up Po, "I refer to this program as my eye." Po played along and beeped dutifully.

"Your eye?"

"Yes. Perhaps a demonstration?"

"Please."

Gef picked a compendium he thought might be handy and carried it and Po over to a small table. He set the book down and Po extended his legs and copied the book. He hoped that the Baron wouldn't ask him to repeat anything since he wasn't really getting the information Po was. But then, he thought, if Po could copy him, would it work in reverse? A real experiment for another day.

The Baron watched Po copying the book and his eyes widened; he practically drooled. He had to get rid of this Draxon character and possess these programs for himself. Then, the Baron had a devilish idea: he could rid himself of another enemy, or possibly both! "What if I were to trade you the Texo Compass to the Ultracircus in exchange for a task?"

Gef had walked away from Po and was back scanning the shelves for any sign of a piece of the Cyclopedia. "What manner of task?"

"There is another scientist near here. She bothers me. You've seen how poor my people are. She raids my people's resources, steals crops and water. I would like her eliminated. That seems like a task you could handle. You wouldn't have a problem with killing another scientist, would you—especially one that really has no knowledge to offer."

"No. I wouldn't," Gef lied. He stepped to the Baron with his best poker face. Given that the Baron was clearly lying about the cause of the plight of his people, and given that the enemy of his enemy might prove to be an ally, this scientist might be someone worth meeting. The Baron was probably lying about the compass, too. Maybe this other scientist had more information. "Who is this scientist?"

"Her name is Vivian. She has a tower at the Lake of the Low. The hanging city of Boisenval is there. If you can fly, it's two days Northeast."

Gef scoffed, "Fly? I can think of much faster ways than that." He couldn't really.

The Baron pulled an object out of this robes, a small metal plate with dials and glass in its center. "Please, feel free to use this to stay in touch. I would like some proof that she is dead before I hand over the compass."

Gef took the object and thought to himself that was it. He had all the information he needed and he needed to get out of there and find the others. But then, he had a second thought. He didn't have *all* the information he wanted. The library existed in two places. He walked back over to Po and picked it up. He turned to the Baron, "Baron, perhaps you might like another demonstration of what my eye can do?" He held Po out.

The Baron barely hid his greed. He reached out and took Po into his hands. "But of course." He turned Po over and over in his hands, looking for any hint of its inner workings.

Gef leaned over and said, "Find out what he knows, Po."

* * *

Able and Nip and the Baron had walked around the marketplace, the Baron pestering Able with questions. Able figured the best strategy was just answer "I don't know," which was also the truth for most of the questions. Then Able figured a better strategy was to answer questions with questions. Able started pointing at things and asking, "What's that?" The Baron would answer, "It's a fruit, a mockmelon, I think. Disgusting."

"What's fruit?" Able asked.

The Baron would give some semblance of a definition and then Able would move on to his next, "What's that?" Or "What are those?" or "What's that do?"

The Baron asked, "Did your master have instructions for you?"

"I don't know. What's that do?"

"That's a *door*."

"What's a door for?"

"By Jupaeter, you are an ignorant clockwork."

"What's that?" Able asked of a fountain, genuinely not knowing the answer.

"It's a fountain. At least tell me where your master made you."

"What's a fountain do?"

"It... it's a decoration. Usually it holds water—water flows out of it. Where's your master hail from? Where's his home?"

"I dunno. Where's the water?"

"There is none."

"Why not?"

"There's not enough of it."

"There's a whole big lake of it underground here."

The Baron was stunned. It was the most Able had said in an hour. "How do you know that!?"

Able shrugged, "I dunno."

"Enough! You will tell me how you know about the reservoir or I will destroy you!" The Baron grew in size and the air around him grew dark.

Able grabbed one of Nip's rings. "What's a reservoir?"

The Baron growled in response.

"C'mon, Nip, let's get out of here!" And with that, Nip and Able took off to the air.

The Baron was stunned. "What!?" He shrank back to his regular size and took flight as well, chasing after the pair as they flew toward the city wall. "Now wait, you! Wait! You can't leave. No one can leave my city."

Able wasn't sure what he was doing, but Gef wanted a way out of the city, so maybe the easiest thing to do was to look at it from the outside. He flew past buildings and rooftops, much faster than the Baron could move. The Baron tried hurling stones at them, but Nip dodged them with ease. The pair flew past the wall and Able looked down to see a large encampment all around the road leading to the main doors of the city. And then he saw Arthra! He recognized Gef's flags.

"Nip! We need to go down there." Nip made a warning sound and Able looked back to see the Baron, pounding on something. It was as if a glass wall had been thrown up from the wall. The Baron was hitting it and throwing stones against it, but the air turned purple and absorbed the shocks. It appeared the Baron couldn't go any further than this invisible wall.

Nip and Able floated back over to the Baron, out of curiosity, just ten meters from him. He was having a complete temper tantrum. "You work for her, you useless little pile of gears, don't you! I know it! She sent you just to toy with me! You come back here or I will—" and then the Baron went silent. He stiffened up like a pole, and his eyes rolled back in his head and he vanished—turning into a cloud of colorful lights that slowly dimmed and disapated into the air. It looked, for a moment, like electrol to Able.

Other than that, he had no idea what the Baron was talking about or what had happened, but they seemed safe for the moment. "Let's go check on Arthra," said Able to Nip

* * *

The Baron was explaining to Ka'Rolly, "But really, you should get up and then we can take a tour of the palace. I have many amazing things I could show you." This had been taking far too long. The Baron wasn't sure what Ka'Rolly was or what they could do, so he was hesitant to force them to do anything, but he was losing patience.

Ka'Rolly let out a long wheeze. They liked the bed.

"You... the dustfish in you, it likes to eat, doesn't it? I have food for Dustfish."

Rolly didn't understand why, but she wasn't hungry at all. She swam in a quick circle inside Ka, who responded by moving its arms and legs like it was swimming a backstroke. Ka made the sound of bubbles burbling.

"Now, look," the Baron said. "I want you to come with me to my—" And then the Baron did a very odd thing, which made Ka'Rolly sit up. He stiffened, his eyes rolled back in his head and he vanished!—turning into a cloud of colorful lights that slowly dimmed and disappeared.

Ka'Rolly whistled and sat staring at the air. Minutes later Ka'Rolly was shocked again when the door burst open and Gef and Po were there. "C'mon, Ka'Rolly! We gotta' go!" Gef ran over to the bed and tried to drag Ka'Rolly up, but something was different. Ka'Rolly was heavier, and thicker, and when they stood up, they were bigger—at least two meters tall! "Geez," said Gef. "What have you been eating?" All four made for the door and down the hallway.

Before long they cam to the same door that Able had tried to leave through. The two metal mechanomen stood with their unpleasant-looking halberds. Gef started to think, but before he could get anywhere with a thought, Ka'Rolly picked him up, threw him over their shoulder, and jumped and smashed through a window in the hallway. The two mechanomen turned slightly to watch, as Gef screamed, "What are you doiiiiiiiiiiiiing!"

At the base of the castle, Ka'Rolly smashed into the stone plaza, shattering it and forming a crater beneath them. They set Gef on his feet. He took a moment to orient and then put a finger in Ka'Rolly's face. "Never. Ever. Do that to me again!"

Ka'Rolly blooped an apology.

"It's fine." Gef checked that Po was all right. The little mistake beeped with glee. "Yeah. Right. Okay. Let's go," and the four of them made a break for the city doors. "Able better have found us a way out!"