# Chapter 12

## In which the crew runs into old friends.

"I suggest we make a very hasty retreat!" Gef had said, hopping on Arthra, running along her back, throwing cable ladders down and helping others up. Despite having run in to Wacamolo and Rilla, Gef didn't feel there was any time for a re-union until they were back on the road. Nor did he want to wait around for the Baron's inevitable recovery.

Able, on the other hand, was very excited to see Rilla and hugged her—somewhat to her surprise. He helped her to a seat on Arthra and sat next to her as they trundled off from the City of Horn. "What are you doing here?" He asked.

"Waca was worried about you. The Baron is a very bad man, and he thought you might get trapped or something worse."

"Well, I wish we had figured out how to help the people that the Baron has trapped. I guess that will have to wait." Able looked at Rilla for a long moment, wondering about why she was here still, "Aren't you sad or scared to be away from your town and your parents?"

Rilla shrugged, "I don't have any parents."

"How do you know Waca?"

"He caught me stealing out of his garbage once. Ever since then, he would give me stuff in the market. When I saw he was leaving town, I followed him."

After a few hours, Gef steered Arthra off the road and out into the badlands again. He and Ka'Rolly and Wacamolo covered their tracks from the road for about a hundred meters. "That should throw anyone off who tries to follow us. Although, I don't think the Baron can follow us." They set off again, shadowing the road from the ridges of the hills.

Gef had already explained to Wacamolo about the copies and the deal the Baron had wanted to make and how he had knocked the Baron out for a time with Po. Wacamolo laughed and said, "I should like to try that!" He spoke directly to Po, "I might have some useful stuff in this old gourd that you could use, little one."

Gef held up a hand, "Let's maybe wait on that. I woke up from the copying. We don't know that the Baron did. Maybe organics get... uh... hurt in the process."

"Fair point," Wacamolo agreed. He set Po down.

Gef continued, "We don't need Po to copy you for you to tell us about this Lady Vivian."

Wacamolo scratched his whiskery chin. "I'm afraid I know less about her than the Baron. She lives in or near the hanging city of Boisenval, which is located at one end of the Lake of the Low.

"Well, I got that much out of the Baron already. If you're gonna come with us old man, we're gonna need more than that."

"Oh, oh, oh. I know more, you bucket of bolts! First of all, the Lake of the Low is a very dangerous place. It's inside a crater called, Nuktut Togait, at the edge of the territory of the Durman. Whatever is in the lake keeps the crater filled with gas. It doesn't affect the Durman; or at least they have equipment to deal with it since they dwell underground."

Able had come forward on Arthra and was peering around Wacamolo. "What's a Durman look like, Po."

Po beeped and threw up a light model of a bipedal creature with skinny arms and legs ending in oddly flat claws. Its head had a long snout with many teeth and no eyes.

"Oh my," said Wacamolo, he leaned in toward Po and turned a lever on his glasses to look closer at how it was making the light.

Able marveled at the light model, "They have no eyes?"

Wacamolo looked to Able, "Yes. In fact, they are known in some circles as the 'eyeless ones.' It is said that they descended from the ancestors of the Noman who lived so long underground, they lost their site."

Po abruptly shifted the light model of the Durman to a topographical map of the City of Horn and the crater, the lands between them, and the surrounding area, as well as an arrow that showed where the crew was located.

Wacamolo could no longer resist and picked Po up, "You are highly useful. What manner of object is this, Gef?"

Gef just said, "Ask him."

Wacamolo looked at Able. "You know?"

Able shrugged, "Sort of. I mean, I m-m-made him."

Wacamolo squinted at Able, "You constructed this?"

"Sort of."

"Very pithy, this one," he said to Gef, who chuckled.

Po was still displaying the map and Wacamolo set it down again. "Can you show me more of the Lake?"

Po let the map increase in size, some of it disappearing. The crater became as big as a bucket. Wacamolo pointed to one end of it and Po spun the map so that part of the crater was in front of him. "Thank you. Very helpful," Wacamolo said. "Here is where the Lake of the Low gives way to a deep valley. The hanging city of Boisenval lay there. The mountains on all sides of the crater belong to the Durman."

"Are they bad?" Asked Able.

"Bad? No. They don't take kindly to surface dwellers, though."

"And this Lady Vivian?" asked Gef.

"She is a scientist, and I believe a much more powerful one than Baron Rollo."

"Maybe that's who the Baron was shouting about," said Able.

Gef interjected, "The Baron was shouting?"

Able explained how the Baron couldn't fly past the wall and how—Able did his best Baron imitation—"You work for her, you useless little pile of gears! She sent you to make toys with me!"

Gef said, "I don't think you have that quite right, but... yeah, maybe it was Vivian he was talking about. He told me she raided his city and that's why his people were so destitute."

"That's not why," Able said, annoyed.

"I know," replied Gef. "That's how I knew he was lying."

"Well," added Wacamolo, "I doubt she will be any happier to see us than the Baron. Scientists don't generally like company."

"Aren't there any good scientists?" Able asked.

"There is a legend—about the Ultracircus—that it was once governed by a council of scientists. They worked to keep the world in balance. However, one of them, in a grand inquiry, somehow upset the balance. They say he intended to travel to the world above the world."

"Where's that?" Rilla asked. She had come to hear the story.

"I have no idea. But whatever the inquiry or journey or experiment was, it was supposedly the thing that dimmed the sky and took the moons away and changed the world into the Shattered Land."

"What's a moon?" asked Able.

Gef answered, "They were enormous rocks that used to fly around the world. They were so big that at night they would light everything up. One was a big round circle in the sky. One was a big ring." Gef looked up to the twilight sky. "They were beautiful."

* * *

At the campfire that night, Gef and Wacamolo were discussing the map. Rilla was piling stones on Able's head. He sat with his legs crossed and as straight and still as he could. Nip caught on to the idea and started adding stones as well. Able sat still, Rilla laughed, and Nip made some version of a laugh as well.

A little later, Wacamolo sat Rilla and Able down to tell them about what the nanosphere was. "Able, I believe, can see it." He then made several strange gestures with his hands before he scooped up some dirt from the ground. He smoothed the dirt into his palm and then threw it at the campfire. It turned into many small orbs of light that changed color and then drifted away from the fire and faded away. "Did you see your electrol in that, Able?"

"Yes! I did!"

Gef, Nip, Po, and Ka'Rolly all watched the trio from the edge of the campfire. Gef was letting Po roll up his arm, over his shoulders and down the other arm. Nip was hovering. Ka'Rolly was looking up at the night sky with its dim, smudged, red stars.

"Can I do it?" asked Rilla.

"Yes. But it will take time," said Wacamolo. "If I can do it, so can you."

Able picked the electrol up without making the gestures that Wacamolo had made, held his hand very near the fire and let many orbs fly up out of his hand. Wacamolo stared at him intensely.

Rilla tried what Wacamolo had done, but failed. "He did it right away! It's not fair; he's clockwork!"

"Rilla, no," said Wacamolo. "We do not call them that."

"But he is!"

"I am," agreed Able.

"No, no, children. A clockwork—it's a thing. Machines are things, like levers or gears. Rilla, Able is your friend." Wacamolo sat back from the fire. "He is your friend, but also he sees a little differently than us. You'll learn more in time. I promise; I'll teach you both more."

"Show us something else!" Said Rilla.

"Very well." Again, Wacamolo made several gestures in the air and this time clapped his hands together and pressed them in against one another. As he pulled them apart, he twisted his fingers like a fan and began to pull them apart where they formed a small dust devil. He set it on the ground and it spun in place between all of them. Everyone marveled at the miniature cyclone. Po rolled close to it and it lifted Po into the air. Po made several desperate sounds, and everyone laughed but Nip who flew down to pick Po up and set him on the ground again. Po whirred in thanks.

Wacamolo turned to Able and said, "You know that little dust devil seems like such a simple thing, as though maybe it is alive. But look as it fades."

Able watched as the dust devil lost power and size and eventually spun itself into smaller and smaller circles that disappeared into the ground.

Wacamolo spread his hands. "It is gone."

Able stared, everyone in the crew stared. Whatever it was, it had been a something enough to even lift Po and then it was gone.

"I want to show you something, Able," said Wacamolo digging through his bags. He pulled out a wooden board and a sack of stones. He laid the wooden board down on the ground where the dust devil had been. "This is called a board of Go." The wood had lines burned into it in a nineteen by nineteen grid. He poured out a bunch of white stones on to the board. "I want to teach you a simple game that will show you some things about how I made that dust devil and how you made your friends. Would you like to know about that?"

Able was curious about the stones. They were ivory white and perfectly circular. He could see that each had the same diameter—the same curvature. He looked to Wacamolo and nodded.

"Very good. Now," Wacamolo began putting the stones down inside squares on the board. "Normally, we would play this game called Go and the stones would sit on the lines. But for what I want to show you, the stones will sit inside the squares. And the rules... the rules are different from other games. For one, there really are no players. Rather,  players can place the stones wherever they like, but rules move the stones."

"So, to begin with, I will set some stones down and tell you the rules: There is On, Off, Evolution and Entropy. A space without a stone is off. A space with a stone is on. A neighbor is anything one space away. A stone with only one or no neighbors will turn off.  A stone with more than three neighbors will turn off because of entropy. A stone with two or three neighbors, remains on.  A space with exactly three neighbors begins."

"Okay," said Able.

"So, if I show you this," Wacamolo set some stones down. "What will happen?"

<div class="symbol">
/images/game-of-life-diagrams.png
</div>

Able looked at the simplest set of stones, a line of three. He pointed to the top and the bottom of the line, "These will turn off—they only have the middle one as their on neighbors. But, These spaces—" he pointed to either side of the line—"have on neighbors, so they will turn on."

Wacamolo and Able went on like this for some time, Wacamolo arranging stones and Able predicting their outcomes. Some of the patterns of stones did nothing. Some of the patterns did the same thing over and over again; like the brundlexes that he'd built his mother. Some of the patterns did unexpected things though. The first one that Able noticed was a pattern that would crawl off the board. "Why?" He asked Wacamolo.

"Simply put, because of the rules," said Wacamolo. "Given the rules, you can find patterns that will do many things. Some patterns will even make more of themselves!"

Able nodded. Maybe that was how the Baron made copies of himself.

Wacamolo began to put the board and the stones away. "That's enough for tonight." Everyone began going to bed and many of them had strange dreams of grids and stones coming to life.