# Chapter 13

## In which the crew make their way through eerie lands.

Gef and Waca and Po were doing their best to navigate the crew toward the crater, Nuktut Togait. The plan then was to try to use the edge of the crater as a path to get to the side where Boisenval was located. But Po's maps were old and the landscape had changed. The fuzzy fungus-covered hills and vales filled with spores, shifted from where they might have once been. And it wasn't just the ground causing them frequent detours. The entire landscape was covered in a forest of fungus; mushrooms as tall as the mesas back in the Idex Mortez. There were mushrooms growing out of those mushrooms and mushrooms growing in great clusters out of those. The air was thick with spores, some as big as a fist. Waca had decided after a few hours that it might be best if he and Rilla wore the masks that Able and Gef had been using as disguises. "Spores like these could be bad for organic lungs," Wacamolo said.

At Able's suggestion, he and Po and Nip would fly above the canopy and let Po try to redraw it's map. After one such flight, Po alerted Gef to something. He showed the map and then showed changes and then showed the map altering again, and this time behind them. Gef watched the animated images and said, "I thought so."

"What's happened?" Asked Able.

"We're not just dealing with novel terrain, we're dealing with a moving forest."

"Fascinating," said Wacamolo.

"Well, that just means there's even less point in turning around," Gef said. "We still need to make our way to the edge of the crater. Po can get us there."

Po "sat up" straight and chirped with a sense of duty. Indeed, he could do it.

But, the traveling was slow-going, so Waca supposed he would fill some time with a story, especially for the children, who seemed bored. He turned around on his pillow, tied to Arthra. "You know children, there is not so much difference between you as you might think. Rilla, of course, you are an organic, and Able, you are an inorganic."

"What does that mean?" asked Able.

Wacamolo sat back. He was shocked that Able should not know that. "Well, Able, I will put it this way. If I were to prick Rilla with a thorn, she would bleed. Have you ever seen that before?"

Able thought about his brother back in the desert. He would bleed from time to time. "Yes."

"That's why Rilla and I are wearing masks. We have lungs that collect our air so that we can energize our bodies. You, on the other hand gather air through osmosis—tiny vents all over your body. And even then, were you to submerge in water—which you would do quite more quickly than we would—you would not need to breath for some time."

Able nodded.

"However, you do consume energy like organics. You do feel things, like organics—"

"Gef says some people think we don't."

"I know. It is an unfortunate fact. Sone organics are very dumb and have forgotten their history. But in fact, both organics and inorganics think, and both think with our entire bodies. In organics, there is a great concentration of thinking in our head, but inorganics, less so. Still, both of us think with all of our body."

Able and Rilla nodded.

"In a world before this one, there was a man once who was organic. He was in possession of a great mind and could make a great many things: amazing buildings, contraptions or all kinds, flying machines. Why, he could even make brand new animals out of molecules—"

"What are—"

"No, don't worry about it. Just listen. He was a very smart man, is the point. And he knew all about his heart and his lungs and his stomach and his brain. And he so enjoyed making and inventing things that he decided to try to live longer than he normally might. You see, organics can die while inorganic do not."

"We do too die," said Gef from the front.

"Not *naturally*—only by accident. May I finish my story?"

"Sorry."

"This man—we'll call him Phaistos—studied himself carefully and began a process of replacing parts of himself. He made a new inorganic heart and new inorganic lungs. With these, he could swim underwater for much longer periods of time and could run at top speed for hours. Of course, his muscles would still get sore, so he replaced his limbs, and hands and feet and fingers and toes. He had a grip like an eagle and could leap as high as a mountain. But he was still not satisfied. He replaced more of himself with more and more of his inventions."

"He even learned how to begin to capture his thoughts and feelings and dreams and store them in machines that would keep them for far longer than any organic could normally remember. He even learned to replace his brain with that machine. And then he could remember everything always and he felt more intelligent than he ever had. And he felt stronger and more aware than he ever had. He found that his new inorganic brain allowed him to perform amazing feats of awareness. He could look around corners or even to far away places and know more than any organic around him."

But here is what I wonder, children. While Phaistos performed these changes on himself, and grew faster and stronger and older—though that did not matter to him so much anymore. Those around him, his family and friends, did grow old. They grew old and—"

"What—"

Wacamolo looked annoyed. "Really?" He sighed. "Go ahead."

"What is growing old?"

Rilla cackled. "You don't know what growing old is?"

Able shrugged and shook his head.

She looked at him seriously, "What about your mean old brother?"

"What about him?"

"Didn't he, you know get taller?"

"Yes. He started as a small four-legged person. Then he started walking and then he started talking. At first what he said didn't make any sense at all—"

"That is what organics do, Able. Like plants, we grow. We grow old. Eventually your brother would be as tall as your father and his skin would get wrinkles. That is growing old."

"Which I don't do."

"Well, in a sense you do."

Ka'Rolly had been listening to the story, as well, behind the children. It crawled forward and tapped its head with its finger and made a rising question sound.

"Oh I have no idea," said Wacamolo.

Ka'Rolly made a sound that might have been interpreted as "Gef."

Gef replied, "No idea either, buddy."

Ka'Rolly made a sigh and looked at Able.

"Are you not happy?"

Ka'Rolly swam in fast circles in its head to indicate that, yes, it was happy. Able suspected it was just curious. "We'll find out," and he pat Ka'Rolly on the head.

"Any. Way," said Waca, with some annoyance. "You will be alive for some number of years, and you can count them and as they go up, you are essentially older. You may even live as many years as this one." Wacamolo gestured to Gef over his shoulder. Wacamolo leaned in close to the children, "You may not realize this, but Gef is much, much older than even me—and I'm ancient!"

"You should replace all your parts!" Said Gef, having heard everything.

Wacamolo sat back up straight, remembering that Gef's hearing was quite good, "Yes. Well, back to my story. Phaistos lived longer than those he knew. His friends and family, even just people he knew in passing, all passed on. He made new friends of course, but they also passed on, and because of his excellent memory he could remember everyone, always. He never forgot a face."

"It made him very sad after a time, children. Very sad. And so, he decided to strengthen his will and feelings the same way he had everything else in him. He replaced his feelings with logic. He made himself so that everything was never something that could make him feel joy or sorrow, but rather a thing to be studied and improved or preserved. And do you know what happened, children?"

Able and Rilla leaned forward.

"He destroyed the world and became a new one. It is said by many that we live in Phaistos."

Rilla and Able spoke at the same time,

"He became the what—"

"How could he be what—"

"Yes, yes. He became everything and nothing at the same time. It is a difficult thing to understand, but it is worth thinking about."

Able and Rilla exchanged glances, puzzled and somewhat terrified. Rilla asked, "Are we living on him now?"

"I think the better way to put it would be that we are living in him. But! Children, not all stories are meant to be entirely  true. Some stories are meant to make you think. Don't worry about if the story is true. Ask yourself what it *means*."

With that, Arthra came to a halt in a significant clearing and Gef said, "We should stop here for the night. We'll get our bearings in the morning and keep pushing on."

* * *

The morning had very different plans. When the crew awoke, they were surrounded on all sides, even above, by thick spiderwebs. The world was silent as they arose and even Arthra, who rarely, rarely made noise of any kind, let out a low rumble to indicate her nervousness. Gef went to her head and soothed her. In addition to the webs, there were twelve mushrooms, slightly taller than Gef, in various positions around the encircled camp site. The crew gathered in the middle, backs to each other.

"I believe we have been captured," said Wacamolo.

"Thanks," said Gef.

With the webs encircling them, the world felt like it had a blanket pulled over it. There was very little sound and no air moving, but still there was a sound coming from the twelve large mushrooms, a creaking. Just as any of the crew was about to suggest an action, the mushrooms began changing, arms unfolding, their "stems" separating into legs. On their large caps, many glassy, brightly-colored eyes opened. They shuffled toward one another, forming small groups around the perimeter and from them a low, low barely audible rumbling came.

"What are these things?" Gef asked Wacamolo.

"I have no idea. I have never heard of such things."

Po rolled away from the group and scanned one of the creatures.

"Po!" Shouted Gef. "Hang on!"

The creature bent down and picked up Po. The two others near it gathered and surrounded Po.

"Um. Excuse me," said Gef.

The other nine shuffling mushrooms were now forming a circle around the crew.

"Excuse me," said Gef, still talking to the three huddled around Po. "That's our... uh... that's our thing?"

Two of the larger mushrooms encircling the group, leaned in close to Rill and Able and their eyes seemed to look them up and down. Then each stood back up and pulled off a small red mushroom from somewhere on their bodies  and each offered it to Rilla and Able. The pair looked around the group for guidance. "Take it," said Wacamolo quietly. "It's probably some kind of good will." Each of the children took their respective mushrooms and held them and smiled nervously.

The rumbling inside the webs grew to such a level that everyone could feel it in their insides. The three mushrooms that had taken Po now returned to the rest of the group. Po had a cluster of mushrooms growing out of the top of him now. The mushroom holding Po leaned down and handed it to Able. "Thank you," said Able looking at Po's new decoration.

*BELLO!* Said a voice inside Able's head. Able stood upon straight and froze. He looked around. "Hello?"

*BELLO! We be under the ground men who wonder doing here you are. Out lands.*

"Um." Able looked to Gef. "I think they're talking to me."

"First things first, Able. Tell them we mean no harm."

Able did just that, he thought it and before he could say it, the rumbling in the webs increased again.

*Barm us you can't. Under the ground men we are. Will you leave?*

"They said they aren't worried about us barming them, but will we leave?"

"Barm? No. Yeah. Tell them we're going to Boisenval," Gef looked to see if any of them understood, but there was no way of knowing. He did spot something peculiar under the cap of one of them. There was clearly a mouth and it looked familiar. He studied their hands as well.

Able thought about the city of Boisenval, what Po had showed him.

*Tbat terrible idea. Terrible. Bad Noman be. Bad science.*

"Uh, they say that going to Boisenval is a bad idea. Bad science?"

"Well, yes," said Wacamolo. "We knew that." With that utterance, one of the closest mushrooms to Wacamolo leaned in very close and scanned him, it's ten unblinking, glossy eyes looking him up and down. "Yes. Uh, Hello." The mushroom rose back to its full height.

*That one noman.* All of the mushrooms pointed their long flat fingers at Wacamolo. *We no like noman.*

Able replied with just his own thoughts, *Well, he's our friend and we like him.*

*Be you a we?*

Able stared, unable to think of what that might mean.

*Be you many who is one?*

"Yes!" Said Able aloud. "Yes. We are."

The mushrooms stopped pointing at Wacamolo. "Thank you for that, son," said Waca.

"Able, be careful what you are telling them. Listen, have Po show them a picture of a Durman."

"Really?"

"Yeah."

"Po, show a picture of a Durman." Po did as asked and the tall skinny eyeless creature that they had all looked at a few days ago appeared in the air.

The mushrooms threw their hands up over their heads and rumbled and backed away from the group.

*AWFULAWFULAWFULPUTAWAYPUTAWAY*

"Ow!" Yelled Able. "Turn it off, Po! Turn it off." He fell to his knees as Po turned the image off.

Gef grabbed him and picked him up. "Able, are you all right?"

Able looked woozy and said, "Their thoughts were just so loud."

Gef set Able on the ground again. He turned to the rest of the group. "I think they're Durman. They're using the fungus like a technology. They're talking to each other through mycelium."

Wacamolo nodded, "Fascinating."

"Mycel-i-what?" Asked Rilla.

"I'll explain later. Able, we have to keep talking to them. Ask them why they didn't like the picture you showed them. Ask it exactly like that. Don't change a word."

Able concentrated and thought, *Why didn't you like the picture I showed you.*

*Naked, alone is no. WE. We are many and strong, not naked and alone.*

Able turned to Gef and said, "Naked, alone is no. *We*. We are many and strong, not naked and alone."

"Even more fascinating," said Wacamolo.

Now the mushrooms had all returned to their circle around the group. *You come see big net. All you come see big net.*

Able looked confused. "Just say what you heard," said Gef.

"You come see big net. All you come see big net."

Gef and Wacamolo exchanged glances. "Big net?" said Gef. "That doesn't sound great."

"You all meet all us," said Able.

"I say we go," said Wacamolo. "They don't seem to care for this Lady Vivian. Maybe they will help us."

"Yeah. I agree. And we don't have too much choice in the matter anyway."