# Chapter 14

## In which the crew and their new entourage make their way into the Hanging City.

The crew was much more jovial after leaving the Big Net. Where they had been somber when being brought by the durmans to an uncertain but possible doom, now that potential doom, in the form of Lady Vivian, was days away! After having spoke to Magnus Kindui, the crew was told they would be given sleeping chambers for the night and that they would leave with the Minus Gendoku in the morning. "How do you tell when its morning in this infernal nest of caves anyway?" asked Wacamolo of no one on the way to their chambers.

"I can't ask them," said Able, examining Po, and unable to hear any voices in his head.

"Oh. No, it was a rhetorical question, Able."

"It danced?"

"What?"

"It was a dancing question?"

"Um. No. I'm not sure what you mean. A rhetorical question is a question that does not need an answer."

Able thought on this. "What kind of question is that?"

"Precisely."

Rilla pushed Able and said, "Like, why are you so dumb?" And she made a silly face at him.

"Oh!" said Able, looking at Rilla, "Like, why do you smell so bad?" He stuck his tongue out.

"Children. You are both correct, but your examples are wanting. And at any rate, asking rhetorical questions is a lazy form of rhetoric. For one, when asking a rhetorical question, you are presuming agreement from your audience and that is an unknown."

"What's rhetoric?" asked Able.

"What's a question?" asked Rilla, then laughing at her joke.

Wacamolo sighed. "I was just remarking on the lack of daylight."

Gef joined in, "Looks like you got your work cut out for you, teacher."

"Ha," Wacamolo replied, giving the children a knowing look, "I could never teach these ninnies anything."

Rilla and Able giggled. But the thought of learning gave Able a different idea and he said to Gef, "How did you see what you saw in the big net's cave?"

"Right. I guess I just thought you did that," replied Gef. "It's a lot like focusing on something. When you do that, can you make the thing you're focused on appear closer?"

"Yes!"

"Well, instead of focusing like that, like pulling, try seeing through something."

"Okay." Able turned and stared at Rilla.

Rilla sat stiff, a little worried. As Able stared, the colors around her shifted and then he began to see her as a puffy white outline with black shadows of sticks filling her in, making her arms and legs and skull. Able began to cackle.

"What!?" asked Rilla. "What are you doing?"

Through his laughter Able said with a spooky tone, "I can see your b-o-o-o-nes!"

"Stop that, Able! Don't look at my bones!"

Able could not stop laughing.

"This is what we're trying to fix the world for?" said Wacamolo to Gef.

Able and Rilla shouted at the same time, "Rhetorical question!"

Gef just shrugged.

* * *

In the "morning," the crew awoke and packed their things on to Arthra. Able had dreamt of the tree museum, but not the tree museum. It was the tree museum but it was open to the sky. The trees loomed over him and in the light they were very green. Everywhere he looked in the dream was green. There was wind and a smell he could not remember once he woke up.

The journey through the tunnels of the Durman was much like the day before: changing widths and intersections and strange traffic. Since the movement was slow, Rilla and Able made a game of standing on the back of Arthra, holding hands. As her legs moved, each pair at a time, the segments of her body would lift, creating a wave of motion that ran down her long body. When the segment beneath them was about to rise, they would bend their knees and then jump as it came up underneath them, causing them to jump higher than usual. Ka'Rolly joined in too. There was just the briefest feeling in their stomachs (or for Rolly, her whole body in the water) of there being no gravity, of freely floating.

Wacamolo had approached Gef and sat beside him at the front of Arthra. Po was with them, while Nip scouted ahead (as usual). "It's nice to see joy," Waca said, speaking of the children laughing.

"Yes. It is," replied Gef. After a few more rounds of counting and jumping and giggling, Gef said, "I can't help thinking... why didn't Able know he could see different wavelengths of energy? I mean, who builds one of my kind and makes them like a child and makes them so that they don't know things?"

"It is an odd experiment," agreed Wacamolo. "Perhaps it was a fantasy?"

"A fantasy?"

"Well, when an organic woman cannot have a child, sometimes there is a sense of loss, or a sense of longing. Speaking as an old man, I really do not know. But perhaps someone built Able to quell that feeling."

"Maybe. He says he had a brother and a mother and a father. And for all the world, it sounds like they were all organic."

"Where did he say he came from?"

"The Idex Mortez."

"Oh my. Fascinating. Very few choose to live in that dead land. Do you know any of his family members' names?"

"You know, it's never occurred to me to ask."

"We should politely inquire some time. It could give us a clue to his abilities." Waca turned and picked up Po, "And it might tell us a bit about you, oh one who is invisible to the Magnus Kindui." Po chirped and puffed up. "You know, I should really like to give that copying business a try," Waca said to Gef.

"I don't like it. But do as you like, old man. Just don't do it while we're moving or you'll fall off Arthra.

* * * 

They came out of the Durmans' tunnels at another massive gate, but this time there was no fungal forest to greet them. There was nothing but rock. As they exited the gate, Wacamolo turned around and looked up the giant cliffside. "Fascinating. We went underneath the crater."

They began an ascent down the side of the crater wall, the trail taking many switchbacks and thinning enough that the durman could no longer walk on either side of Arthra. Instead, six walked in front and six walked in back. Wacamolo and Gef and Able looked at Po's map. Gef said, "This part still looks the same as the map." He pointed down the hill to where a valley opened up at the base of the crater. Structures could be seen, but not what they were. "That's Boisenval. We'll be there by this afternoon."

Nip sat himself on Able's head and tugged. "Nip wants to scout," said Able to the others.

"I don't like it," said Gef. "Sorry Nip, but we don't know anything about this Vivian person. What if she's got some kind of protective barrier over the whole place? No, we should all approach together."

Nip fussed but relented. "It's all right, Nip," said Able, patting his friend.

As the afternoon passed, the clouds relented enough to let the far away, dim star appear as a bright circle in the sky. The structures became more clear. The valley continued down into a canyon. From the top of the canyon there were vines and ropes and nets and anchors. They draped over the edge, so that the valley and the canyon itself came to look like a massive, haphazard knitting experiment.

As they continued to descend and came to the bottom of the beginning of the canyon, they found it to be filled with a large calm lake. The Lake of the Low. The procession had to edge along the shore of the lake on one side. Able could sense that there was something strange about the lake. Someone had built rails all along it. He tried to use his new vision to sense anything about the water, but to no avail. He said to Gef, "There's something strange about the water."

Gef said, "Yeah there is." He picked up a small hunk of metal, some lugnut he didn't need and threw it into the lake. Or rather, *on to* the lake. It landed on top of the water, almost as if the water was solid and then it began to sizzle and smoke and slowly it melted into a small puddle of metal on the surface and dissipated.

"Oh," said Able.

"Yeah," said Gef.

"A slurry of acid of some kind?" asked Wacamolo.

"I think so. Some kind of run off from whatever is in the crater I think."

Wacamolo looked closely at the reflective surface of the lake. "This does not bode well."

* * *

When they arrived at Boisenval; crawled and walked into the city, no one wanted to see them. Everyone in the city saw them and closed their doors and windows. There was not a single welcome, only fear.

The procession, six durman in front, Arthra, the crew, then six more durman, walked into Boisenval and through the hanging buildings and vines that made the canyon walls they walked between. Then, Vivian appeared in front of them. Dressed in gossamer white satin, she waved her hand at the durman soldiers and turned them to stone. She looked to everyone on Arthra and said, "You obey me now."

Able watched and could not understand. Gef, Wacamolo, Rilla, got off of Arthra and stood next to Vivian. "Do you not obey?" she asked.

She looked at Nip, Po and Ka'Rolly and unraveled them. Nip's lights were taken apart and it became a square hanging in the air. Then she turned her attention to Po and the same thing happened. Po was turned into a square of light in the air. And Ka'Rolly... she pondered it.

"Do you not obey?" she asked of Able.

"I don't know. I don't think so."

"Everything obeys me, boy."

"Sorry. I—why are you making everyone obey?"

"Everything obeys me, boy."

"Okay then. I guess I don't."

"Who are you?"

"I am Able."

"Nonsense."

