# Chapter 15

## In which Vivian meets Able

Vivian made everyone go to rooms she had made for them. Able was unexpected. Vivian had seen the future, seen this rabble coming. Not Able. She calmly sat herself in a large chair in a tower with a window that looked out over even the Idex Mortez it was so high. "You will obey me." She said to Able.

"Okay! What would you like?"

"No! Obey me!"

"Let my friends go."

"NO!"

"Okay."

"What are you?"

"I don't know. I've been told many things. Some people tell me I'm a child. Some people tell me I'm an abomination. Some people tell me—"

"Enough!" Vivian leaned toward Able from her chair, "Obey me."

Able smiled.

"OBEY ME."

Able smiled.

"What is... what are you made of?"

"I don't know."

"You must obey me."

"I don't think so. Sorry."

"You were made. Who made you?"

"Evo."

"What!?" screamed Vivian. She sat up straight in her chair and light poured out of her body, up into the giant chamber that Able couldn't actually remember coming to. One moment they were in the city and the next they were here.

"Evo was my mother."

"You virulent garbage nonsense—how dare you!?"

"I dare what?"

"How dare you name a member of the council, you insolent wretch."

"Council?"

"The council! THE council!"

"I don't know what a council is."

"Evo! You knew Evo!"

"Yes. She was my mother."

"Evo was not your mother, you little wretch."

"Um, she used to tell me that I could see colors where no one else could."

"Evo told you that?"

"She also gave me some cubes that I used to make some of my friends." Able looked down. "You tore my friends apart."

"You cannot be a creation of Evo!"

"Well, that's fine. If I'm not and you're sure, will you let me and my friends go?"

"If you are a creation of Evo, you will tell me about her and how you came to be here. Even if Evo made you, why in the world would she let you wander free?"

"My mother always told me I was free."

Vivian scoffed, "That's not the Evo I know."

"My mother—"

"She cannot be your mother!"

"My mother always told me I could change this world."

"Again, not the Evo I know."

"Would you like me to show you her grave!?" shouted Able. "Because I would very much like to go back there and quit this stupid business where people I meet get hurt and suffer and you're just trapping my only friends and if you really know my mother then I don't understand this! Let my friends go!"

"No."

