# Chapter 21

## The crew arrives a the edge of influence

The early morning passed fast as Arthra wound her way up the hills leading to the mountains. As the crew approached the peaks of the Cullens, life began to dwindle. Any color faded. The change in the landscape had an effect on the adults whose mood went from one of leisure to one of glum fortitude. There were going to be hard days ahead again. Rilla and Able hardly seemed to notice. Rilla was busy practicing her cantrips, simple actions and manipulations of the nanosphere to make small lights appear above her hands. Able and Ka'Rolly were there to cheer her on with "Ohs" and "Ahs." She had learned from what Waca knew and one of Vivian's staff had shown her some new gestures that seemed to help.

The morning gave way to noon and then afternoon and then evening. With Arthra's speed, the Cullen Mountains no longer appeared in a distant haze, but rather seemed to loom over them. The crew stopped and slept and ate without much incident, setting off in the morning again. Wacamolo told the crew of things he had learned from his new book. He knew new council member names like Sirus, Hanna, Aziz, Turab, Soare, and Duri—who Waca noted, did not seem to be one person, referred to in the book as "they," but also "she." Still though, the lands past Vivian's domain, ending on the other side of the Cullen Mountains had no name or scientist associated with it. Between  the Cullen Mountains and the Silt Sea there was simply little information. "Odd that," said Waca.

Gef shrugged, "Maybe it's new."

Waca and Nicolle gave Gef puzzled looks but Gef just shrugged again not even sure what he meant himself.

In the morning they ate, packed up and set off again. Now as they began to get into the mountains they had to tighten the pack ropes and even belt themselves into their seats as Arthra began to ascend steeper and steeper planes of rock and even cliffsides. Her hundred feet clung to the rock with tiny hairs that worked like velcro. And more than once, Ka'Rolly fell off. Of course, it landed without harm, but the crew would have to stop and retreat to retrieve it. Ka'Rolly seemed to have no conception of the change in their pitch. Able remarked that maybe it was because Rolly was in water. Eventually they just tied Ka'Rolly down with the rest of the luggage and it didn't seem to mind at all.

By the second evening, the peaks of the Cullen mountains were in view. Any sign of life was gone. There was no even lichen. There was a mist and it was cold. The crew had to dawn more clothing. And there was no sound. From the distance, there would come some sound of a rock bouncing down a rock face, but unseen. There was nothing to burn for a fire, so Waca and Nicolle worked together to make a glowing, warming cube out of a metal box that she had brought. The crew huddled around it and the nomans ate the rations that didn't need to be cooked.

"This place is quiet," said Nicolle. "It should be peaceful, but instead it feels eerie."

Gef had been on high alert since they had entered the mists, saying little the entire time. But now he spoke, "I detect nothing. There really is nothing but wind and rock."

Waca asked, "What of this vapor? It's not moisture. Look, nothing dews."

Then, as night truly fell, there came low booming from up near the peaks, each boom accompanied by a flicker of blue that would appear where the boom occurred, expand out like ripples on a puddle and then vanish. At the first occurrence, everyone jerked their heads in the direction of the deep sound and the light. No one said anything. Then, minutes of silence would pass and just when it seemed like a fluke, it would happen again. The crew stared off into the darkness until a boom would happen, followed by a blue haze that would cause the silhouette of one of the Cullen peaks to jump out of the night. Still, no one said anything until after an hour or so, Gef said,  "Bedtime, crew. I'm sure we'll find out what it is in the morning."

* * *

When they arrived at the peak of a mountain that Waca said was called Contra they paused. With the help of Po, Waca had laid out a path that would take them from this peak to the next, Bax, along a path called the Knife's Edge. The path was one of the last landmarks discussed in Remory's Guide. The only other two were a series of spikes called Helipor and a Lake called Vux. Still, Waca said that they should cross the Knife's edge and there they would find an easier path for Arthra to use to descend.

As for the boomings and the blue haze, they could see nothing. Gef could see from Po's map that the Knife's Edge would take them to a trail that would then turn and bring them back under the very peak they were standing on. He stared a the spot he suspected the trail would take. "We should stop past the next peak, find a lee and wait for nightfall."

"What do you suspect, Gef?" asked Waca.

"I don't know. I just don't think whatever was happening last night was a random event. And judging from the sound and lights, I think it was coming from down there."

Meanwhile, Nicolle had grabbed both children by the collars and was holding them as they had gotten too close to the peak's edge for her comfort. "This ground is not trustworthy, children. At least hold on to a rope secured to Arthra before you go peering over the edge."

The children rushed off to Arthra to do just that.

Nicolle looked at Waca and Gef with exasperation. "These children know no bounds. Children in Boisenval play, of course, but... they have some sense of their mortality."

Gef watched as Rilla and Able, with ropes tied around their middles, laid on their stomachs and looked over the edge again. Nicolle huffed, "Children, those are not even good knots!" She rushed to help secure them better, showing them a knot called a bowline that was good for holding a weight, such as themselves.

Gef and Waca stared past the lower hills trying to discern what might be next. The landscape past the lower hills of the Cullen was a strange color. "You see it?" Asked Gef.

"My eyes are not nearly as good as yours, old friend. But I do detect an odd color down there."

"It's metallic."

"Fascinating."

The crew moved on once more, Arthra nimbly twisting over the Knife's Edge. The trail was thin, perhaps five or six feet wide, made up mostly of piles of boulders that Arthra crawled along like a monorail. On either side of the trail was a five thousand foot drop. The view was breathtaking, literally, with Waca and Nicolle breathing heavily, both because of the thin air and a persistent gnaw of fear. 

In a couple of hours, Arthra reached the second peak and began to wind her way down the north side of the Cullen mountains. An hour in, Gef spotted a good place to stop. "We'll stay here for the rest of the day—see what's up."

* * *

Once again, mists rolled in, night came, Waca and Nicolle set up a warming cube and the crew sat and waited. Gef and Nicolle had traveled down the trail aways, leaving Waca to teach Rilla and Able a new game with the Go board. Po watched. The Nips were busying themselves with a game of chase glowing orange in the night. Ka'Rolly watched them. Away from he camp, Gef stared into the dark, while Nicolle had a device called binoculars that allowed her to see like Gef could, even a little bit in the dark. For a long time both saw nothing.

Then, large lights the size of lanterns began to appear out in the dark. They revealed themselves in pairs and were yellow. At first, they appeared below a tree line. Then, one by one, the pairs of lights rose above the scattered shadows of something angular and fractal. Each pair of lights was accompanied by a silhouette, and by the black shadow against the black night sky Nicolle and Gef could see that they were giants, perhaps 40 meters tall.

They moved slowly and with a strange grinding sound and an ultrasonic hum. Finally, Nicolle and Gef could see for themselves what the booming the night before had been. The giants were picking up massive boulders and hurling them up the mountain, trying to throw them over the peak and over the Knife's Edge. But as soon as a boulder reached the edge of the Cullen, it would slam into an invisible wall that would light up blue and ripple in the dark as the boulders would crash back down the hill.

Gef and Nicolle turned and sat with their backs against the rock they were hiding behind and then looked at each other, and Nicolle spoke first, "That wall must be Vivian's doing, but she's never mentioned it."

"Look at your ring," said Gef.

They both watched and as a boom sounded out from one of the boulders smashing into the wall, and the wall lit up, Nicolle's ring also brightened. Gef said, "Definitely Vivian's work."

"What are those creatures?" Asked Nicolle.

"I'm not entirely sure—not what their purpose is. I can tell you this: given their heat signatures—or lack thereof—they aren't organic."

"They're synthezoids?"

Gef smiled, "No. Synthezoids would never be so dumb as to do this over and over, night after night. No, these are robots."

Nicolle looked puzzled.

"Yeah, I know. We'll get to the difference later. The good news is I think we're safe. Robots can be pretty single-minded and these look like they've got their marching orders."

"Why wouldn't Vivian have said anything about this threat right here on our borders?"

"Why frighten people? They're clearly no threat. They might have been doing this for decades... longer even."

"So we just wait until morning and sneak past?"

"If you look at all the energy they're expending, I have a feeling that they go dormant in the morning, spend the day re-charging. Yeah, we can probably just sneak past."

"But who sent them?"

"That's the question. Once we're past them, what are we walking into?"