# Chapter 22

## The World Begins to Turn Steel

As the crew descended out of the Cullen Mountains, the robots that had been throwing boulders the night before now looked like disheveled temples abandoned at the side of the trail. They sat or knelt as if they had collapsed, some even lying down on the ground as though they had exhausted themselves in the night. Their bodies were metal, but the metal was rough and grooved and and rusted. They were adorned with stone armor that had gathered moss. They all also had patches of dark paneled areas that looked like glass. Able remembered just these kinds of panel on the upside-down beetle at Ghendra's house and he told Waca of this.

"Must be solar collectors of some kind," Waca hypothesized. "Might explain their dormancy this morning if they worked all night."

The path became a similar mixture of materials, at times stone and natural looking, at other times, scratched steel. In some places Arthra even slipped because the ground was as smooth as glass and there was no surface rough enough for her microscopic hairs to latch on to. The so-called "tree line" from the night before was made up of spikes that came up from the ground only to branch out into hundreds of leaves that were dark blue and made of glass as well.

As they traveled down and perpendicular to the mountains, Gef pointed out hundreds of heavy cables that appeared to climb up an invisible surface. He estimated that must be where the wall of energy had stood the night before, resisting the boulders. "I'm not sure the robot giants last night were attacking Vivian's barrier," he said to Waca and Nicolle.

"What were they doing then do you think?" asked Waca.

"Those cables—" he pointed to the piles of black and silver tendrils that rose up from the ground, clinging to nothing. "When the rocks hit the barrier and there was that shimmer of energy—is it possible that those were capable of syphoning off the energy?"

"It gives me hope that's why Vivian never mentioned the threat. Perhaps she knew it was no threat," said Nicolle.

It was early in the morning, the sun still rising in the North,  and Able and Rilla were asleep in their saddle, curled up like leaves facing each other. Po was with them, gently glowing. Ka'Rolly was still tied to the nets behind the children's saddle. Nip was high overhead, ever vigilant.

"Should we stop and investigate?" Asked Waca.

"I don't know," said Gef. "I really don't want to wake one of these things up."

Nicolle said, "You said you would explain to me the 