# Chapter 24

## Into the Frying Pan

The Dustmyn were covered in cloaks, heavy goggles, equipment, and wrapped entirely in bandages. The only part of them that gave any indication that they might be noman was their wild, dark, shaggy hair that formed like bushes but then ran down their backs and in some cases even over their faces. Rilla noticed their hair right away. Their coifs were so full of silt that they seemed to each possess their own individual cloud as every time they moved dust would shake put of their hair and float around, sometimes right back into their hair!

Nip had landed the nomans of the crew in front of the Dustmyn in the hopes that the group might be able to offer some assistance to Able, Gef, Arthra, Ka'Rolly and Po. But those hopes were quickly dashed as no sooner had Nip helicoptered everyone down to the ground than the Dustmyn had cast nets over them and proceeded to pull apart and tie them all up. They had placed Nip in several clay jars, which despite its best efforts, it could not break out of it. Nip was nimble, Nip was quick, but Nip was not that strong.

The more decorated Dustmyn had been conferring about what to do about these invaders to their plateau. To Nicolle and Wacamolo it appeared that there were two groups that had already been meeting when they arrived. Each group had its own sigil decorating their clothing and weapons—which appeared to be mostly anchors and ropes and chains with spikes. Nicolle noted some carried crossbow-like implements. The two groups were having a dispute about either what to do with the interlopers or who got to decide what to do with them. Their language was soft and whispery, almost like they were hissing at each other.

They had been their, bound at the wrists, for what felt like a very long time at the edge of a cliff overlooking the nightmare of the automatic jungle, it's dark staticky mist swirling and sparkling, when Arthra came barreling up the cliff to come in front of them, standing on end like a tower, only to immediately come crashing down in front of all of them like a tree falling, and with as much noise, mere meters away. The Dustmyn immediately ran away. Whether it was simply the sight of a massive centipede, or the commotion, or both, wasn't clear, but they were having none of it.

Gef and Able and Ka'Rolly (who had barely hung on for the ride up the cliffside) all dismounted and ran to Rilla, Nicolle and Wacamolo, untying them and helping them up. There was a lot of talking, Rilla and Able especially chasing each other and talking about the flight, the game, the escape, barely hearing one another as they shouted details with very little narrative. Nicolle and Gef and Wacamolo stood in a small circle, hugging one another (a little to Gef's surprise) and then Gef spoke first, "Who was that?"

"Dustmyn!" shouted Wacamolo. "Not the bandit kind! My word. Real, actual Dustmyn. Fascinating!"

"Fascinating until it seemed like they were going to eat us," said Nicolle rubbing her own hair to get dirt out of it.

"Really?" Said Gef.

"No not really. But who knows what they were arguing about. But you! You escaped those menacingly little-whatever-they were."

Gef shrugged, "We tricked them and then Po did its thing."

Nicolle laughed, "Its 'thing'."

"What?" Gef asked, unsure what she found funny.

"Nothing. I just want to see it for myself. What happened?"

"Well, we go the... whatever-they-were to merge into larger and larger versions by getting them to play, and then when Po copied their intelligence, they just... disintegrated."

"Oh my," said Wacamolo.

Gef took off his hat off and scratched his head. "Yeah. What *was* that, Waca?"

"I've some ideas, but no knowledge."

"There's nothing like that in the guide?"

"Nothing."

Gef walked away from the group, back to the edge of the plateau and looked down at the jungle. Nicolle and Wacamolo joined him. "I almost want to go back."

"What!" Said Nicolle.

Gef shrugged. "It's been a long, long time since I've seen anything new. And that was new."

"We need to focus on the task at hand," said Nicolle. "Able should fire the Texo Compass again."

Gef took one last longing look at the jungle. "You're right."

They all heard the children shouting madly behind them and turned with fright again only to see that Ka'Rolly had picked up each one of them with one arm each. They were clinging to its fishbowl head as it spun them like a carousel.

Nicolle smiled with relief, "Well, that looks like fun."

* * *

That was the last of the fun that anyone was going to have for a time. Able (with Po and Nip) had fired the Texo Compass and the beam shot out to the Northwest across the immense flatness of the plateau. The whole terrain was devoid of anything. There was nothing to look at and nothing to see for miles. No growth, no water, barely even hills or rocks. The sun, covered and dimmed by the mist in the automatic jungle, was now absolutely punishing. Everyone but the mistakes covered themselves in everything they had just to escape the barrage of heat, but even the mistakes seemed drained by it. Nip had taken the unusual position of sitting with Po and Able and Rilla. Ka'Rolly had climbed into the hiding chest. Arthra was moving at slow pace.

The creatures of the jungle had ruined, broken or stolen many of their supplies. Gef was very worried about the amount of water they had left. He called Po up to the front of Arthra and he and Wacamolo consulted both Po's light models of the area and Remory's Guidebook. The only thing that was clear was that there was nothing ahead of them for kilometers and kilometers. If they veered west, there looked to be a small structure of some kind called Kvet. "That's likely to be Dustmyn outpost. I'm not sure we should go."

"I'm not sure how many days we can do this. By my calculations, it could be another five days before we reach the Silt Sea and we have no idea what we'll find there anyway and no idea how to cross."

"What do we know about Dustmyn?" Asked Nicolle.

"They have a bad reputation," said Wacamolo. "But then, the ones around Kinton Station and ______ badlands weren't necessarily real Dustmyn. They may have been pretenders posing as such when they were really just bandits. The people we saw yesterday were quite different from what I've seen of Dustmyn."

Gef added, "Even Able and I disguised ourselves as Dustmyn to keep people from bothering us."

Nicolle said, "You mean lynching you."

"Well... yeah."

"Horrifying. Brutish. I still can't believe it, Gef." She reached out and grabbed his hand.

Gef looked at her hand, then said, "Thank you." He moved his hands over to the guidebook in front of Wacamolo and picked it up.

"I'm not too worried about Arthra getting water. She can go for weeks. But we can't. If we ration carefully, we have six to seven days for ourselves."

"Pardon me for asking, but you and Able don't need water, correct?"

Gef looked up from the guide book, "We don't need to drink it like you, but we can overheat like anything. We need some sort of coolant. Water will do in a pinch."

"And other than water?"

"Oil supplements. Fat's pretty ideal."

Wacamolo pat his belly, "You can't have mine." He said with a smile.

Nicolle laughed. "How do you manage to have that weight given where you're from?"

"A lovely little thing called Brew." He looked wistfully into the distance, "Although I haven't had any in weeks and may never have any again!"

Gef chuckled and said to Nicolle, "You would like him when he's got a few brews in him. He gets real mystic."

Wacamolo crossed his arms, "Drinking Brew and being one with the land is long tradition for my people. It is not a laughing matter."

"What's it like?" asked Nicolle.

"He gets all one-with-everything," said Gef and made a spooky gesture.

"If we ever get the chance, Nicolle, it would be my honor to guide you on a psychoquest. You and Rilla when she comes of age."

"I think I would like that," said Nicolle.

Gef rolled his eyes, "Anyway, I think we need to head to this Kvet, Dustmyn or not. If there's a structure there, there's likely supplies. We have things we can trade."

"Or," said Wacamolo, holding up one finger, "we could put on quite a show."

Both Nicolle and Gef looked puzzled.

"Between myself, Nicolle and Able's mistakes—especially Po's light works, we could put on quite a show. We should consider that. It is both diplomatic and a way to gain respect."

"That's interesting thinking, old man."

"What would I do?" asked Nicolle.

"Well, let's discuss that as we veer West, shall we?"

* * *

They traveled for a day or so further before stopping and covering Arthra in as many covers and tarps as they could to give her a break from the heat. The crew took water-soaked rags and rubbed her down underneath the covering. She rocked back and forth with glee. Afterwards, the crew gathered underneath her and the coverings like a  tent and continued to discuss their plans to create a show for the people of Kvet—if there were any people to be found at all.

 