# Chapter 26

## Escape from the Hoard

For the third time in their adventures Able and the crew found themselves deep underground in a cavern and surrounded. (Once by a tree museum, once by mushroom men, and now by Dustmyn.) At this time, since they had been lead down to this place, they could maybe assume that the Dustmyn were allies. The chamber appeared to be much more than a hideout, with large hexagonal hallways leading away in all four directions. They had entered from a large staircase in the corner. Their entrance may have been impromptu, but nothing else about the stone, decorated walls seemed that way.

Some of the small people with their giant, bushy hair, had begun lighting globes, glass orbs that could shift from being opaque to being transparent and once see-through it could be seen that the orbs were filled with purple glowing grubs. As more of these globes lit up the chamber took on a cool lavender color. Nip decided to add to the fun and positioned themself equidistant around the space, glowing to match the hue of the grubs and the room grew even brighter. The Dustmyn whispered in a hushed tone in awe. No one had seen anything like Nip.

“As I said above, I am Alharih. Welcome to the city of Kvet.” With that, he bowed and many in the crowd sank to one knee.

Gef spoke, “I am Gef, and these are my companions: Able, Po, Ka’Rolly, Nicolle of the Evershem, Wacamolo of the Idex Mortez, and Little Rilla. That one up there is known as Nip.”
Gef decided to stick with their original plan, because why not? “We are a traveling group of entertainers.”

Alharih looked skeptical. “I see.” He turned to his people and whispered. Each Dustmyn who heard him turned to others are whispered the news as well and on like that until the chamber filled and emptied with an undulating hiss. Alharih continued, “As you have seen, our city has been infested by a hoard. We have been familiar with the K’th’K’that but they were individuals—scouts—merely looking to trade. We have never considered them enemies. Then one day, without any warning, their swarm appeared and covered the sky. They built their hive in a matter of erns.”

Nicolle looked shocked. “Erns!?”

Wacamolo leaned over to Nicolle, “What’s an ern?”

“Less than a day.”

Gef replied to Alharih, “I have encountered these people before. My people call them cimexapods. In all my years, I have never seen them invade a territory beyond their own. This—“

Alharih interrupted, “You are a Keeper?”

Gef couldn’t see the point in lying now and removed his hood. “Um. We prefer the term synthezoid.”

There were cries and gasps from the crowd. Alharih waved to quiet them down. I apologize, Keeper. We have not seen one of your kind in generations.”

Keeper. Gef smiled as he had not heard that name in a long, long time. It was good though—very nearly a term of endearment. It was certainly a term of respect. “You know of my kind”—a rhetorical question.

“Yes. Our legends speak of your caretaking; that when you disappeared, our green valleys disappeared as well.”

Nicolle whispered to Wacamolo, “Green valleys?”

Wacamolo just stroked his beard.

Alharih continued, “Many of our covens don’t even believe in you or that the valleys ever existed.”

“Covens?” Asked Able.

Alharih looked at the child synthezoid with great curiosity, even kneeling down to his level. “Our people live in enclaves together mostly underground all throughout the Asyk peninsula.” He stood again and faced Gef. “Entertainer or not, you are a Keeper. You must help us rid ourselves of the K’th’K’that. You have an oath.”

“You do?” Asked Able.

Gef rolled his eyes and rubbed his head, “Yeah. Yeah I do.”

Nicolle laughed.

Gef shot her a look and she covered her mouth. Looking to Alharih he said, “If there were more of my kind, we might be able to help, but there’s only me and Able. I’m not sure what we can do.”

“You’re a keeper. They don’t want your flesh. That must be useful for something. And what of these devices of yours?” He gestured to Nip and Po and Ka’Rolly.

“No,” Able stepped forward. “They’re not devices; they’re our friends.” Able picked up Po, who, without prompting, p;layer a quick song and made a light sculpture of a flock of doves flying away—not that anyone knew what doves were.

The crowd again reacted with shock, some with glee and some in fear. “Po,” Able chastised, “don’t show off.” Po chirped, pleased with itself.

# # #

Since it was apparent that the Dustmyn were not in need of entertainment, Gef conferred with the group and decided they should switch tactics. With the crew off away from Alharih and his soldiers, Gef told them, “I do have to help them, but none of you do. We can still ask them for passage across the Silt Sea and we can exchange me for it.”

“What!” shouted Nicolle.

“Never,” said Wacamolo.

“No!” said Able.

Even little Po booed the idea.

Ka’Rolly crossed its arms in front of itself in an X.

“Why would you stay anyway?” Asked Able.

Wacamolo concurred, “What would you do against that insect hoard?”

Gef could see that the crew had made up their minds to stick together and saw no point in arguing. “I do actually have a plan, but it requires Arthra.”

Nicolle asked, “Do we know where she is?”

Gef smiled, “I know where she is going to be and that’s precisely why we need her. All we have to do is wait. They have a hoard, but we have one too. One that little Po here can help us with.”