# Chapter 27

## The Big Dig

The crew were sitting around in a circle around some of the grub orbs. Ka’Rolly in particular seemed very fascinated by the objects, holding one in its hands and alternately tapping on the glass with its mechaniGef fingers and then tapped on its own head, the pitch of the glass between the two being different. Rilla and Able sat and watched with amusement and discussed what it might be thinking.

“Ka’Rolly just wants a friend,” said Able. “There’s no one else like it.”

“I think it likes the music,” argued Rilla. “If they’re lonely, why don’t you make another one?”

“I need something my mother gave me.”

“What’s that?”

“It’s hard to explain.” Able scratched his head. “It’s like a… it’s like Wacamolo’s game. It’s a cube sort of thing and I can add pieces and get them to move, but I need the game board.”

Just then, an enormous amount of yelling came from down one of the large passageways leading out of the chamber. Gef stood up from their huddle, “She’s here.”

Wacamolo cried out, “I’ll be a wermel’s backside! You were right.”

Approaching Alharih, Gef said, “You told your people not to hurt her?”

“I did. I’m sure all we’re hearing is a little bit of shock. It’s not every day we encounter such a creature, Keeper.” Alharih looked around the small group. “It’s not every day we Dustmyn encounter anything like any of you,” he said, smiling. Dustmyn, not keen to emote, have a smile that barely registers as a curve, but Gef could see it. “We trust you to set things right.”

Gef rubbed his hands, “It’s a long shot, but it’s the best I’ve got.”

Just then, Arthra pushed her head into the chamber, being tailed by a few panicked Dustmyn who were attempting to coral her with no success. Gef walked up to her and gave her a grand hug, scrubbing her mandibles and brushing dirt off her eyes. “Hey, girl. Didn’t want to hang out with your fellow insects?”

Arthra shook herself all the way down her length, flinging dirt everywhere. All of the rest of the crew ran to her, shouting her name and petting her, cheering.

Nicolle approached Gef in the din and asked, “So when do we get to hear this hair-brained scheme of yours?”

“Right now. Arthra here can’t dig through stone, but everything on this peninsula is sediment—clay and compacted sand. She tears right through that.”

“So, we’re digging our way out?” asked Wacamolo.

“No,” said Nicolle. “I bet we’re digging our way *in*.”

“Actually, we’re sort of doing both.” Gef paused for fun. “The Dustmyn now live in a series of these underground havens dotted all over the plains, and most of them, according to Alharih are interconnected. We need to create a funnel that goes from the Rothanapod hive back to the automatic jungle.”

“You’re going to bring that technological mess to the hive? And then what? That gray goo will devour everything.” said Nicolle.

“Even more,” added Wacamolo, “digging like that could take months!”

Gef cautioned, “Kvet is the Dustmyn’s last above-ground city. Every one of them will join the cause. It may take time, but we’ve got Arthra too. She’s fast. And once the monkeys have consumed the hive, we can use Po to deactivate them again, then clean up.”

“You’re mad,” said Wacamolo. “But then, if I had a better plan, I would suggest it.”

* * *

Wacamolo turned out to be mostly right. Even with the help of the great Arthra, the dig project took the better part of a month. The crew stayed occupied in various ways, always coming together at the end of the day in a small townhouse that the Dustmyn had provided for them. They discovered that the city of Kvet was much larger beneath the surface of the badlands of Hargo. There were levels and levels of streets and buildings, stores and markets, government buildings. The nomadic appearance that the Dustmyn presented on the surface was in no way reflected in the brilliant city life underground.

Gef mostly spent his days with Arthra and Wacamolo and Po and some of the Dustmyn engineers, winding their way through the underground, making a tunnel back to the automatic jungle. The engineers re-enforced their work with massive iron beams and in some places, large iron pipes that the Dustmyn normally used for other functions in the city, like plumbing and electricity.

Wacamolo mapped and diagrammed everything he could for he had set upon creating his own version of Remory’s Guide to the Archelux. He could see the beautiful chitin-bound tome with gold leaf lettering in his mind: “Wacamolo’s Guide to the Modern Archelux”. He kept Po with him for references and he also discovered that Po had an ability to trace some light sculptures to paper by lightly singing the pages. His own drawing abilities were acceptable, but Po’s precision was unbeatable.

Able split his time between exploring with Rilla and studying with Nicolle. The student of Vivian had taken over a room in the lower portion of their townhouse and was busy constructing various machines, some of which she then used to make tools. But with Able, the pair mostly studied Nip and Ka’Rolly in an attempt to surmise how Vivian had multiplied Nip.