# Synopsis

Able is a boy living in the Desert of Idex Mortez, in the Shattered World, with his dying mother Evo, his zealot of a father Jedidiah and his brute of an older brother Kane. Able is abnormal, not a real boy, but a synthezoid, unbeknownst even to him. And he has the ability to make things; strange things, things that move about of their own will and accord, things, that, in his father's eyes, serve no purpose and are abominations and sins against the Ungod, entropy. Still, day after day, Able hides his mistakes, Nip, Po and Ka, away, and dutifully helps his father turn ancient artifacts of science into small amounts of a fuel for nearby nomads and traders to get food and water.

After Kane attacks one of Able's mistakes, the mistake fights back and Jedidiah banishes Able to the desert with his abominations. Without his mother to defend or protect him, Able wanders out into the desert in search of nothing. He want  for nothing. But he does meet an old woman named Ghendra who tells him of fantastic ideas and a place where he would be welcome: The Ultracircus. She says if he were to only seek it out, he would find happiness and welcome. After first, Able refuses, but upon traveling home again to find his mother dead, he decides to go. He must seek out a man named Gef, on of the traders near the Delphine Metoer's path. Gef is in search of the Cyclopedia and with the help of his mistakes Ghendra believes Able can help Gef find it and the Ultracircus, a massive city on legs that roams the Shattered World.

From there, an epic journey begins, across the Delphine's path, to Kinton Station, through hollows filled with gas-powered tigers, through the Temple of Trees, to the City of Horn where the Baron Rollo Leocadia rules with an iron fist. Along the way, Able gathers many friends: Wacamolo the wise and Rilla his best friend. He even builds a friends in Ka'Rolly, a dustfish he saves from the badlands. In order to locate the Ultracircus, Able and his crew must find a texo compass, a type of device that can be tied to an object. The Baron tasks them with getting it from the Terror Vivian. Through the mycoidal forests of the mushroom people, the Durman, the crew travels around Nuktut Togait, a massive poisonous crater and makes their way to the hanging city of Boisenval, the home of the Terror Vivian, who quickly turns their friends to stone, hypnotizes all the crew but Able, and imprisons them. Able begs her not to, revealing that he is the son—creation—of Evo, Vivian's long, lost friend and fellow council member.

Vivian accuses him a liar and to show Able a demonstration of her power she moves to irradiate her stooge, the Baron Rollo Leocadia. But Able stops her, pleading for kindness and mercy, and she realizes that he is Evo's son and that she has lost her way. She imprisons the Baron, repairs his fiefdom, releases Able's friends and reveals many truths to them. Among the knowledge she gives, she reveals that there once was a council of scientists who oversaw the Shattered World, a world known then as Warnel. The twelve council members brought harmony to the world, until Vivian's husband, an ambitious man named Jupaeter tried to bring energy into this world from another and failed. The vortex began working in the wrong direction and the Shattered Land began; the world was falling apart.

Able's mistakes, are in fact, programs, and Vivian believes that, much like Jupaeter  (sometimes called Gabreel), Able is the only person in the world who can create such machinations. Perhaps they can help, she tells Able and his crew. But the texo compass attached to the Ultracircus is not a thing she can give them, because it is Able himself. With this, Vivian bades them farewell and the crew, with a new member, the acolyte of Vivian, Nicolle, set off to find the Ultracircus.

They travel across the Cullen Mountians, past massive boulder hurling robots, through the mists of the automatic jungle, fend off synthetic simians, contend with the Dust Men and sail across the Silt Sea.