---
title: Re: the Critique
---
I'm mostly certain that replying to your actual email address would do me no good, Rausch.[^13] You've already proven that you've worked out a good deal of details here. But, seeing as how I am delivering my next five thousand words to you tomorrow, I wonder if you would mind that I respond to your madness right here in the text of this... I hesitate to call it a book still. Nonetheless, you saw fit to write to me about what you thought of what I had written so far, I feel it more than fair enough to respond to you right here. After all, your 'critique' made no mention of using this medium (if you will) as an opportunity to respond to your criticism. And you do, apparently, have many, of me.

First off, you are an incredibly condescending prick. I have to assume for a moment that name-calling is something you'll just have to tolerate. I'm not going to stop, and I can't think you would think I would. Again, you made no point in your critique or your ransom "packet" that I couldn't address you or that I couldn't call you names. So, I will for the moment, because it's wildly satisfying, and right now, the only satisfying thing in my life, you prick. Whatever the epic madness of what you are trying to accomplish with your plan—it's not that I need to understand your motivation or your plan—it's impossible. Your arrogance is clearly clouding what you're doing.

I just feel that the nature of the plan itself gives me clues into who you are. One, wildly arrogant for thinking you can get away with this. Two, it is a plan with many intricate parts, and I find that intricate things tend to break apart more easily for all their moving parts. Every day I grow more confident that you will slip up. I'm going to be at the ready Rausch, for when you do. And contractions... are they sloppy Rausch? I know some people who think like that. I know people who think about plot before they think about character. I wonder what kind of hack you are.

In your email you mention that you expected to be disappointed by my first five thousand words. What insane individual wouldn't expect that—expect to drive a man into a complete panic of nonsense given the crime you've committed against me already. But I think this implies something slightly different. I think it means you know me Rausch. I think we know each other and I think that makes my ability to discover who you are all that much more simple. It reduces the number of suspects in this case by a billion or more.

But I'll give you something in return for now. My approach will be more honest. Why not? I've nothing to go on right now, so for now I'll address the facts of the story at your behest. Besides, since I suspect I know you now, combing through my history might prove to be extremely useful. Let's suppose that you're not my adversary—hard to swallow, but—let's say we're working together like a psychotic editor and a scared and threatened writer. I'll give you that it's an amusing dynamic to consider when I think of other works of fiction I've read. So, in short, you're right and I was right: this is not a game.

You chose the word 'exercise' and then you discarded it later in your message. You stuck with the word 'game.'  You said it was a cliche and then you went with it anyway. I think the lyricist is cooked. Maybe, for me it has to be an exercise in patience. Of course, another way to put that is that this is a hunt. You didn't use the word 'hunt' in your ransom package did you? No, you didn't. You're not hunting anything. You're hiding like a coward and holding on to something that I love and keeping in the shadows. See, Rausch, this is just a *hunt*. I'm going to find you.

And along the lines of my earlier statement that I will try to bring honesty to this *hunt* and I will avoid cheap tricks like repeating myself or copying and pasting, but if it's honesty you want, Rausch, you're going to have to know that tricky word will bring about parts of the story that you might not like at all. You don't want to make rules and yet for all your lecturing you've created a sword of Demasocles in your one rule: that I cannot have back that which I love unless I do this task for you, and that I cannot talk about the one thing that I love.

In creating this one rule, you've place a sword over your own head, too. You know about the gun? Good. It's like they say about Checkov: introduce a gun in the first act and you are insured that it must be used by the third act. I don't know about you Rausch, but whether what is mine gets returned to me or not, this gun is going to off.[^14]

At any rate, if you want honesty then you're going to have to let me talk about what you're doing to me and how you're doing it. How else can I continue?[^13] How am I supposed to talk about my deepest feelings, how I'm navigating this story, if you won't let me write about the most important parts? I agree with you that this is a challenge and that some creative challenges come with rules.

Okay, so the six word story is good partly because there is a six word rule. My rule is fifty thousand words. Fine. But no good novel is going to come of this process if you don't let me tell the whole truth and nothing but the truth. That veil needs to be lifted and I need your permission to lift it. Let's make this a little bit simpler. I accept the fifty thousand word challenge. You accept that I need to write about everything that's happened. I won't use double-talk or try to be needlessly wordy, but obviously I have to get at the truth here. You claim to have already outwitted me at every turn that I can expect; so what's your worry if I explain the whole ransom packet, or if I talk about my heart? You have my heart; at least let me talk about it.

[^13]: I'm also really certain that you've no idea that directly addressing your smug critique was the idea of Agent Samantha Cobb. I'll go into more detail about her new theory on the case later, but what we came away with was the idea that I need to plead with Rausch to get more details in order to fill the goal. She suggested that as they gather details, they can feed them to me and I'll continue to engage in the dropoffs. More details and Rausch might start to get nervous that I'm getting too close. He might mess up. Of course, at the next drop off I'm going to have an army of undercover people around me. If the courier shows up again, he's not losing anyone.

[^14]: Reader—an earnest footnote!—I later found out that this concept is directly attributable to Anton Checkov the playright, who is quoted as saying "Remove everything that has no relevance to the story. If you say in the first chapter that there is a rifle hanging on the wall, in the second or third chapter it absolutely must go off. If it's not going to be fired, it shouldn't be hanging there." I know that the first act of this nonsense certainly involved my purchase of a .38 snub-nose. I've no idea what the second and third act are going to be, but pay attention. I think they happen quickly—much more quickly than the first act.