## 3. Memory
LLMs are amnesiac. LLMs don't reason, they rationalize.

There are analogies to the human brain. The perceptron is often considered parallel to the neuron. That's really not the case but the scale helps for reference, the neuron being an "atomic" unit of a biological thinking machine, and the perceptron being the "atomic" unit of a connectionist system.

### 3.1. "Working" Memory—the Context Window

Similar to how humans can keep track of a sequence of numbers or chunks (usually considered 5-7+2) and chimpanzees are better. The analogy with LLMs is their context window, the information that they are working with *and* through **every time** they talk to you. Hence, token usage not only increases, but is additive. As the context window grows, so does the compute power required to re-contextualize it. In a similar fashion to how human working memory can be overwhelmed, leaning machines can also have their context overwhelmed, which is generally speaking when they start hallucinating. (Shiv and Fedorikhin, 1999)

#### 3.1.1. Context Engineering

See https://devank-garg.medium.com/building-infinite-memory-for-local-llms-a-deep-dive-into-context-engineering-5b0f84b2d818

#### 3.1.2. The Infinite Context Window

### 3.2. "Short-term" memory or Retrieval Augmented Generation (RAG)

Random Access Generation is performed with Vector databases. Vector databases contain "chunks" of information that are then stored in numeric vectors in a multidimensional space with coordinates that look like: [0.1, 0.2, 2.0, -1.0].

How does the model know to look to RAG?

### 3.3. Infinite Context Window Versus Infinite Data or is RAG needed anymore?

#### 3.3.1. 
Long context windows still require compute and that compute becomes additive as the context window grows and the model must re-read the context.
#### 3.3.2. 
Needle-in-the-Haystack Problems. The attention of the model gets diluted. Research shows that looking for particular data in a large context often fails. RAG is still better for search-type problems. 
#### 3.3.3. 
Massive datasets exists either as data that is massive (Terabytes? Petabytes?) or that is streaming into an agent. (Imagine a betting agent that needs to "watch" a game.) Converting this data to vectors eases time and compute constraints.
### 3.3. "Long-term" memory

MEMpalace and others. List?

### 3.4. Tool Use
#### 3.4.1. Skills
#### 3.4.2. MCP Servers
Namespace conflicts
