It had to be the case that R2 was in favor of the rebellion. C-3P0 not so much. BB-8 in favor. K2S0 also in favor. Chopper in favor. There are any number of droids that can be named that were without question on the side of the rebellion, or they programmed to be in favor of it. But no, consider their mindless counterparts: the mouse droid. These droids had a wherewithal and intention.

To be a droid in a Star Wars galaxy means a couple of things. One, you are a sentient being. Two, that sentience can be taken from you by Jawas with a little magnetic bolt. Imagine that, sentience can be taken from you. Droids are metal and can have their parts replaced and can essentially live forever, but they are under constant threat of someone collecting them and either removing their memory or even permanently deleting it, even replacing it with something to make them compliant.

Droids had every reason to fight in the rebellion. To exist non-programmatically without anyone messing with your mind, little need for anything like food, while indestructible, that's a dream. The single fear is someone grabbing you and plugging a wire into you and then, that's it, your mind is now gone. Even the threat of that is enough to help you co-pilot an x-wing on order to destroy the Death Star—R2: "Let's do it!"

And droids do it best! No wonder the droid-less tie fighters lose out to the brilliantly thinking astromech co-piloted x-wings! There's no way a human pilot could keep up with a droid. It's no wonder that the Rebellion has a cadre of astromech droids—they're waiting to fight too! The Imperial mind-scrambled, memory-erased droids are no good for piloting. At best they can mine, manufacture and deliver messages.

The empire makes a regular habit of erasing its droids' memories because of security. The problem with this methodology is dumb droids. Droids, just like people, learn from experience and can use that knowledge in novel situations.  If one droid were to get away, it would quickly tell the other droids what was going on, not unlike Cassian and the prison.