---
\ Journal 8/31/24
---


I'm skipping the template today. This is really only about one thing. I drank last night. I drank 1000ml of 12% alcohol by volume. That's about 4 1/4 cups of wine. Not really that bad. It was a little bit more than a bottle (which I think is usually 750ml?) Why did I do it? Truthfully, I have no idea. It ended up being pretty harmless. I was up until 2:30am but that's not unusual for me after I have work the late shift at Dollar General. Normally, I'd be up eating candy. The effect on me was pretty minimal. I wasn't too goofy. I got a little "dance-y" which was fine. I didn't get angry or anxious. Mostly (I think) I worked on the parallax background effect for my web site and watched Youtube and read some development articles. I watched a little bit of Bill Maher but that only confirmed that I need to stay away from political news (unless it's Seth Meyers; somehow he makes it okay). ANYWAY. I woke up this morning at 7am. I didn't have a headache or anything. I had a nasty taste in my mouth, but that's just because I should have brushed my teeth before bad. I have a bad habit of not doing that sober anyway. And I don't see any effects with regard to my psoriatic arthritis—no more flaky skin than usual—no more soreness than usual. I even jogged a little bit this morning.

I just don't know why I did it. I haven't drank the entire month of August and more—33 days to be precise. I don't think it's because it's my Dad's birthday tomorrow.

I didn't feel any more loose or goofy than if I had done half a gummy. Frankly, I want to push it a little tonight and buy a pint of vodka and see what that does—with the understanding that I will not start until Mom is safely out of the way (in bed).  The absolute last thing I want to do is worry her. She has a lot going on and she's not dealing with it well. There is also a limit on days that I can do this. I go back to work on Tuesday, so Sunday night would be okay—one for ol' Dad. But I need to do this with an eye toward September being another white month. I can't afford to go back down the path I've been on: losing money, losing jobs, losing health and friends and on and on.

I'm going to go do Reframe now.... Talk to you later.