---
title: Drones and Other Modern Technology Clichés
---

So, the jig is up. Thanks for that Rausch. The FBI are on to your ass, no matter what kind of acrobatics you pull, and it is an interesting thing as to what happens next, because, frankly Rausch, I think I know who you are. At least, I know this: whatever this game is, it's so important to you that you are willing to make concessions just to see it out. How bizarre? You would make compromises in this, the most dire of situations, just to get fifty-thousand words from me. You know, if you didn't have my family captured, I would almost feel complimented.

Still, after the show today, you can't seriously think you can get away with this, right? I mean, the best thing for you to do at this point is surrender. We—and it feels good to say "we" now—it's you and we. We're going to find you, Rausch. Still, you missed the net we cast for you, and this "game" is still on, so I will dutifully give you the next five thousand words for Thursday, the ninth. I will happily give you more words, Rausch because I know something you don't know.[^20]

* * *

The text message showed up at about the same time Thursday morning as they did Monday morning. But it came as a complete surprise to me what it said:

    Thu, Nov 6, 11:15am
    Meet at the South side of the park nearest to your home; same bench, same man.

I was at the station with Detective Smythe and Agents Cobb and Caravale. They immediate jumped into action, barking orders at some undercover officers already at the park. "Check on location of subject: male man, heavy-set, possibly in a blue pea coat and hoody." Then, this message:

    Thu, Nov 6, 11:19am
    Bring all your friends, Allen. We'll have a party.    

So, Rausch knew. But it didn't matter, the park was crawling with officers. There were two in cars at the exits of the park facing opposite directions on the avenues. No one was going anywhere and not getting followed.

I got in an unmarked car with Agent Cobb, unarmed this time with anything but the USB drive I had copied my stupid files on to. There was enough there (in the files) to make Rausch happy, but I had the desperate feeling that if this trap didn't go somewhere, didn't lead somewhere, I was going to hear about it from Rausch. So, I took a deep breath and clutched the little drive in my hand.

Agent Cobb noticed and reached across the car to put her hand on my shoulder again as we pulled on to the Avenue that ran down the East side of the park. She clutched my shoulder hard and said, "We've got all the angles on this, Allen. Just do your part. Get the guy the disk and then just hang back. This isn't going to be a car chase. You want Rausch. We want Rausch. We're going to get to him."

Just then, the CB crackled and, "Subject appears to be on some kind of motorized skateboard."

Agent Cobb grabbed the CB and spoke back, "He's going to go for the alleyway at the South end of the park after the pick-up. Caravale, you ready?"

"Copy that, Cobb. I'm in place in vehicle and officer Quinn is on foot outside the alleyway. We'll see him."

We got to the East entrance of the park and Agent Cobb pulled the car up along the sidewalk. Just before I got out of the car, Agent Cobb looked at me seriously and said, "Allen, our plans hinge on you just doing your part. No heroics. Hell, if this goes wrong, I'll write the next five thousand words myself, okay?"

I smiled. What she'd said was really a relief, even though I didn't believe it. At that moment, I didn't think Rausch could really get away.

It was still warm for November. The walk from the entrance to the bend in the park sidewalk that lead to the bench was excruciatingly long. There were high hedges around most of the bend and as I came around them, I saw the man in the pea coat and hoody and sunglasses. He was standing on some kind of thick platform with wheels and a cord from the platform up to his hand. It was a peculiar-looking machine. I consciously took a deep breath and kept walking. As soon as I was within maybe ten feet, the man, "Hold it," and held up his hand.

I stopped, dizzy. My eyes inadvertently darted around to see if I could see any of the officers. The surroundings were clear though. I wondered where they all were. There were at least a dozen people in and around the park, but from where we were, you couldn't see any of them. Then, the man, without warning, flipped his wrist and zipped up to me on his board. Even though I couldn't see any of them, my earpiece spit out, "Subject in motion."

The stopped just short of me and said, "Let's go; let's have it." He held out his hand.

I was panicking. What the hell was this skateboard thingy? What did Rausch have planned. We weren't ready for it. But, hand shaking, I handed the disk over to the man. Before I could say anything... who are you? ... who is Rausch?... the man was off in a silent blast of speed. I stood, dumbfounded, waiting to hear what happened next. The only thing I could think was that the man in the pea coat did, in fact, head for the alleyway entrance to the park on the South side.

My earpiece spoke to me, I didn't recognize the voice, "Subject has entered southern alleyway."

Another voice, "Copy that. Waiting for eyes on."

Long moments passed. Caravale: "He's not coming out. He should be out by now."

Quinn: "Quinn, here. Do I go in?"

Cobb: "Get eyes on him, Quinn."

Quinn: "I can see through to the park. He's not in the alleyway."

Cobb: "Get in there, Caravale. Get in there."

Long seconds pass. I realize I'm still just standing by the bench; probably in the same position I was when I handed off the drive. I start to walk toward the alleyway.

Quinn: "Woah! There he goes. He's doubled-back!"

Caravale: "Wait! Wait! What is that? Third floor, Quinn."

Quinn: "What the hell is that?"

Cobb: "What do you have, Caravale?"

Caravale: "It's a drone. He handed the package off to a drone."

Cobb: "Shit. Where is it?"

I look up over the trees at the South end of the park just in time to see a small insect-looking device just disappear over the top of the apartment building in the southeast corner of the park. Before I know it, Cobb is running up next to me, walkie-talkie in hand. "Quinn, get to the other side of that building. Don't lose the drone."

A small wailing electric engine sounds off to the east of us in the park. Cobb shouts into the walkie-talkie, "Who's got eyes on the courier?"

Someone: "I've got eyes on him; he's down an alley off 3rd avenue, heading East. I can't keep up. He's fast."

Cobb puts her hands on her knees, "Shit!"

* * *

The drone flew off southeast over the trees and was lost. After another hour of combing alleyways to the east and north of the park, officers found a pea coat, a hoody and an electric skateboard ditched in a dumpster nearly two miles from the drop off.

Plan B was that the USB disk was loaded with a hidden executable file that, with the right computer (fingers crossed) would ping a server. Cobb felt that was enough to trace the disk. The program went off without a hitch, leading to a block of IP addresses that lead to a computer cafe also a few miles from the drop off. By the time the FBI got to the shop, Rausch—I suspect it was Rausch—was long gone. In fact, the drive was still sitting in the computer. The FBI had experts go over the computer to see what it had done besides send a ping to their servers, but nothing. No URLs had been requested, the computer had effectively done nothing. Dead end. Rausch: 2, Us: 0.

By that time it was about 5:30 and Cobb told me to go home. She said she'd come by to check on me. She said she'd keep her promise and help me write something. Small comfort that.

[^20]: I know where you live.