---
title: Old Stories
---
All right, Rausch. The next drop off is tomorrow, so I need to get more done to hand off to you the words you value so much. So, for fun, I'm going to start at the *very* beginning.

I'm Allen Worthington. I was born in Lexington, Massachusetts, to Judith and Lionel Worthington. I grew up in suburbs as a weird kid who liked to read and didn't go outdoors. My parents never cared that much. They both highly valued education. At dinner, which we had every night, they would quiz me and my younger sister on what we had learned that day. I would list the planets, my sister would explain the rules of soccer. To this day, we are very different.

Being academic—being a nerd—is the primary quality that I think of when I think of myself. I distinguish nerd from geek. I think geeks are hardwired in a sense. They want to take things apart, dissect them (even if they are concepts), and obsess. I don't think of nerds as obsessive—I think they hoard knowledge, yes—but it's because the knowledge is like money is for people who are greedy—they need more than is rationally necessary to survive. Consider you Rausch. You're a psychopath, or at least a sociopath. You must be hoarding something; was it hatred for me for some reason? Was it hatred that you hoard for some unknown slight I made toward you? I don't know. I suppose we'll find out. I also don't know if this fuzzy qualitative distinction between nerd and geek is important, but since I'm trying to describe myself, I feel it necessary to point out that I see a distinction and I think I fall squarely into the camp of nerd.

At any rate, while others played at army soldier or football or whatever else they did, you could find me reading. I'd read stuff I didn't like if I had to—I was never a fan of real science—but at recess there was a crop of woods at the edge of the playground and there was a tree there that I would go sit at the bottom of and read. It was a more carefully chosen spot than you might think. For the first several weeks of, I guess, third grade, I would take my reading material out to the playground only to have it taken away by the teachers and told to go play. Even for a third-grade me, this was highly annoying. So, what I did was put the book in the waist of my pants and cover them with my shirt and head down to the edge of those woods...

Wait a minute. I just realized... I think that place where I lost the courier...

Anyway, I would head to the edge of the woods—not so far as to arouse suspicion—and then I would look to the lookouts (teachers) and wait for the right moment to slip behind this big tree and take out my contraband materials and enjoy myself until the sound of the whistle sent me sneaking back again. I think it was Steinbeck who said that if you want your children to read the classics, put them in a locked cabinet and tell the children never to read what's in it. Now that I think about it, that little secret trek that I had to take daily made the reading all that much more succulent.