---
title: Living with Ghosts
---
After the debauched drop off and hours and hours of pouring over information possibly gained from the found USB drive, looking for fingerprints on it or the seized computer from the shop. Cobb told me to go home and I couldn't resist her demand. As much as my heart wanted to, my body and mind couldn't take anymore. I needed to rest, to regroup. I needed to think about something that had occurred to me late last night, after reading Rausch's latest missive. Several things in that email were nagging at me.

Of course, there were more flowers, more notes, more emails from people who had heard what was going on. Someone had even left a pot of soup with a note and instructions on how to warm it up. I hadn't eaten anything all day. Somehow I wasn't hungry. I stood in front of the fridge and ate cold cuts and cheese out of the packages. I stood on the in the door letting the cool air mingle with the cold house. I turn the little light inside off with the door trigger. I think the fridge was somewhat foreign enough—something I'd not paid enough attention to—that now it was something I could stare at and not be reminded of everything that was missing from the house. Most of the house looked terrible to me, memories scattered everywhere.[^23]

It included the speculative memory of the hours before I had come home that last Friday night—a night far, far away in my memory now. There was a nightmare of a man coming in the front door, holding my wife and daughter at gun point; a nightmare of my wife fighting him and losing; a nightmare of the two of them, bound and gagged, and hauled away like animals.

* * *

Reza Bahadir has a story about living with ghosts, in a sense. It is very much in the sense that memories and reality can become confused, at any rate. The story was, for Reza, a way  to explain the phenomena known as deja vu. At least, again, with my likely inaccurate translations, I could be mistaken.

Reza tells a story of a man named Nader Aga, who possessed an ornate time-piece that he obsessively checked throughout the day. In the culture and time that Reza wrote, time mattered little and time pieces were rare. Even more so, Reza writes that Nader lived almost a century prior to himself. So this was a watch of significant value. Whether that was why the man obsessively looked at it many times a day, no one could really say, but Reza postulates, based on the journal of Nader that he found, it must have been either an obsession with the passage of time or a need to find reality again after losing track of it.

Like me, Reza also wrote several essays on lucid dreaming. He said that he learned of it for himself from the journals that Nader Aga wrote. In that journal, Nader described the fact that gradually, as he dreamed at night, he would check his watch as he always did. But in the dreams, the watch made no sense. It was in those moments that Nader would realize that he was dreaming. Like me and like Reza (described in his own essays) Nader began to more easily awake in the dream and then be able to control some aspects of the dream. In some cases, the man could "fix" the dreams. He could repair the scene, so that a mishmash of jumbled places could become a place that he knew well.

When Nader Aga would finish the construction in his dream he would look at his watch and decide on a time. With his mind, he would position the hands. His bedroom become eight o'clock in the morning.[^24] His living room became 9am. Various other rooms and halls and places even beyond his home became associated with different times of day. He found he could use the watch down to various minutes and even seconds, and those times would become immediately associated with places in his mind. If he found himself in a dream, which he reports that he did every night, Nader Aga could focus on the watch, think of a time and then find himself in that place.

Reza notes that Nader Aga, at several points in the journal, in a desire to protect others from his experience, said that the key was the position of the hands and not the numbers on the watch face. Focusing on the numbers only served to wake one up from the lucid dream. Reza, at this point, also notes that the man's writing in his letters gradually deteriorates, and they also become gapped. One journal entry would begin with some half-finished idea in a fashion that the man had already been talking about it for some time.

Nader Aga himself writes that as he aged, he began to lose his vision, and that there was no way for him to see the numbers in the watch face. To make matters worse, the watch face itself aged and the numbers lost their prominence. Nader begin to lost the ability to know if he was dreaming or not. Sometimes he would be in a place and be certain that he was there and awake, only to check his watch and see that the hands on the watch face matched his memory of the place. Was he there by coincidence or by design?

Reza speculates that part of the reason the journal is gapped toward the end is that Nader was writing in his dreams and those parts of the journal were lost to ether of the dream world. Reza also wondered (as do I) if Nader Aga died in his dreams, perhaps only to be left there.

* * *

Agent Cobb came to see me around 8:00pm.  I invited her in for a cup of tea. She said that she had only come by to see that I was okay and to let me know that for the time being they were posting an officer at my door. I said, that what I really needed, was "news and someone to talk to."

"Not really my job description." I looked at her, blankly, I'm sure. "But I will take a cup of tea."

I got busy fetching the tea and she sat down in the living room while busying herself with her phone. I came back into the room, sat catty-corner to her in an armchair, and said, "It takes a few minutes to steep. In the meantime, can you tell me anything?"

She sighed. She didn't want to have this conversation, it was clear. Maybe her sympathy for me and what I have to do in the next several days, changed her usually distant positioning. She muddled through. "The techs have a theory that there was no evidence of upload or download on the computer because Rausch," she paused. She felt the same way about the name as I did. I could tell. It was like talking about a shadow, a ghost, a legend. The chupacabra and Ragnorok. She continued to say that there were no uploads because all Ruasch did was copy the files he wanted to another USB drive—one without the FBI tracing executable. He seemed to just want the files.

"And that leaves us where?"

"Nowhere. Frankly, the only thing it tells me is that you're not Rausch."

We stared at each other, me leaning in, her leaning back, holding her tea in her lap. I wondered whether to believe her. During the drop off I felt innocent, but in only the few days of dealing with Rausch, I had learned to do some calculating of my own. I could've hired a second courier to fetch the drone. I could've coordinated the effort. It didn't really matter to me right at that moment if anyone believe me.[^25]

"I'm not going to lie to you, Allen. Rausch is a little worrisome. He does not fit the profile of a kidnapper—not one that I've dealt with. Most kidnappings are acts of greed and aggression. It's why we're usually on such a tight timeline. Rather than get caught, most kidnappers would rather," she paused again.

I sat back and said, "Dispense with the evidence."

"Try not to think like that."

"The only thing I hold on to is that Rausch is deep in this game and that for some twisted reason he'll stick to his promise if I play his game."

She nodded and bit her lip.

"So, you've dealt with other kidnappings?"

"Yes. Several. None like this. I am not at all used to sitting around doing nothing. But, we've just got no leads."

"I understand. You did everything you could this morning. I don't fault you at all."

"Thank you."

"Rausch said in his second email that he specifically wanted me to deal with—write about a feeling of impotence. He said it was something that didn't get enough attention in literature. I haven't figured out yet how to write about it. It's an empty concept to me."

[^23]: Like so many things in these footnotes, this is for me, not Rausch. He can never have this.

    Standing there in the dark kitchen, in the refridgerator door, without warning it hit me: another time, another house, a different refrigerator. That's how the memory works isn't it? It adds components up, and without your permission, hands you something to remember; usually something beautiful or interesting, but sometimes terrible. My little Anna, three years old, was hot from being in the old house with a broken air conditioner. I had gone to the fridge to get something to drink and following me at my feet, she plunked herself down on the floor of the open fridge, clearly enjoying the cool air. I was a new father. I didn't want to upset her by moving here away from her obvious goal. I thought on the matter and remembered something Josie had said. Use distraction.

    I looked down at little Anna. She looked up. Then I feigned concern. "Where is Bugsy?" Bugsy was her new best friend, a plush snowbird. She immediately got up and shuffled off. I laughed, know that my wife was a genius.

[^24]: I should point out that Reza lived in a modern Persia (Iran) in the early 1900s, before and after the installation of a Shah in 1921. The man that Reza spoke of lived approximately a century before. So, one thing I have not researched is the concept of time in that period and whether or not the people of Iran in that day and age made much use of time. It seems reasonable that they used some form of 24 hour day, but I've learned things about the keeping of time that leave me unconvinced.

[^25]: After Cobb and I talked about her and a little bit about her experience with cases like this, I went to my desk and brought back a pile of notes that I'd put together. There were things I'd found on the Internet. There were photocopies of old grad school papers with notes. There were highlighted phrases from Rausch's emails. I put them in front of her, on the coffee table and proceeded to tell her a few things.

    "The thing is, I'm a student of literature. I've always secretly wanted to write but  in my studies of other writers and authors I learned to be afraid of the effort. Writing secretly; it suited me. When I was in college I started writing a series of stories; fables really. Well fables and dreams and nightmares. I modeled my work after authors like Italo Calvino and Jorge Luis Borges—men who knew how to create mazes in their work. Oftentimes, these authors wrote about 'histories' as though they were scholars, when in fact, most of the time, the authors, places and things they examined were fictional."

    "I made up a name for myself: Reza Bahadir. It had all the ring of something outside of our culture, something magically foreign, someone who could be ancient. The name also protected me, to a certain extent, because I could write about great fiction without figuring that I was accomplishing it. The world is full of wolves who devour artists and their art. They take pleasure in tearing down other's constructions. By removing myself once from that equation, I could escape some of the criticism—somehow. I don't know. I was young. I had different ideas."

    "The thing is, I can count on one hand the people who knew that I was Reza Bahdahir. In fact, there are four." I opened the folder, on the top of which was Rausch's last email. "On your advice, I planted some things in my writing, maybe things to be commented on, things to be criticized. After the email Rausch sent, I knew he was a wolf. I knew he couldn't resist being smug and flaunting his knowledge. Only four people have ever known that I write and analyze the work of a fictional writer named Reza Bahadir." Then I pointed to a line I'd highlighted in Rasuch's second email:

    > "I mean, 'paraphrasing' Reza Bahadir was mildly inspired, although I think you and I know both who that really is."

    Yeah, I know you know, you smug bastard.

    Agent Cobb took the paper and read the phrase. She picked up the rest of the email and started reading other things I'd highlighted fom Rausch. She looked up at me, brow furrowed. "So which is it then?"

    "His name is Paul Nolan. He's a literature professor like me; my old advisor, in fact." I pulled out a paper that he had graded and pointed to the nearly full page hand-written comment on the last page. "No contractions, for starters. Look at the two emails. No contractions. And, I don't know... the tone." I pulled two more pieces of paper from my folder and explained that he was a retired Professor Emeritus at a University just south of mine, meaning he had tons of time and not far to go. I had called his University and gotten his last contact information. I asked the department secretary what his duties were with the department and she said that after a mild stroke, he helped students with editing and writing papers online.

    "Who are the other three people that knew you were this Reza person?"

    "My wife, my mother, and my best friend. They're none of them suspects."

    She raised an eyebrow, then returned to the notes. "This university is only about two hours from here... and lucky me; it's across state lines." She smiled? I say it as a question because I was suprised. She set her tea down, gathered the papers and asked if she could have them.

    Relieved, I told her "absolutely" like it was two words. She seemed to be leaving and I asked if that was the case. "I'm getting Caravale and we're making a trip to G______ tonight. We'll see what we can find in the morning."

    I couldn't believe it. "You think I'm right? You can't think I'm right. You're FBI; I'm an English teacher."

    "It's a lead. I'll take it. Go write, Professor. We'll be back for the next drop off."