---
title: Down the Rabbit Hole
---

I hope the cliché nature of that title really chafes your brain, Rausch. Unfortunately, for both you and I, it is apt. Still, if I weren't trying to irritate you, I might call it, "Down the Whirlpool." Does that reference any literature you already know? It probably does. You're the kind of man who can't accept creativity. Everything is derivative to you, you're so god damned smart.

I don't know what possessed me, but I drove out to the outlet malls and bought a pea coat, a gray hoody and sunglasses. I bought the ones that I felt most closely resembled that of our mutual friend, the Courier. I checked some online maps, too and sure enough, my hunch about following the courier and where he went could be right. 

I put on my new costume, grabbed my gun and a flashlight, and ditched my protection. There's been a detail outside my door for days now, so I headed out the side door to the garage and hauled my out-of-shape-self over the neighbor's fence. I headed down to the park, walked to the north end, and vanished into the woods—just like your man. It was surprisingly easy to follow my previous path. Memory works like that, right Rausch? You're in a panic, you're afraid, you remember details. I had never chased a man before and you gave me that experience. Thank you, because it gave me enough wherewithal to remember exactly how to get to the pool in the creek where I gave up chasing your courier.

This time, crossing the tree over the creek was no problem. I was determined. Hell, I might've just stomped through the creek. Who cares at this point? I just wanted to know if I'd found some loose thread hanging off this damned story.[^28] I headed up one steep hill and down to a dry creek bed, up and over again like that, keeping the sun on my left shoulder, heading North. It took about a half an hour to drudge through the wintery woods, but sure enough, I emerged from the woods to face a playground, the size of a football field and covered in rusted instruments of play.

Am I supposed to think that's some sort of coincidence, Rausch?

I walked along the perimeter of the woods and the playground, looking for that long lost place of respite. And I found it, Rausch, I found it. I found where I used to sit for thirty minutes every day and lose myself in the thing that I loved. I took a moment and sat in that nook and chuckled when, of course, I no longer fit.

Then, I turned on to my stomach, as I sometimes did when the whistle would blow and I would pretend that I was some spy trying to get into enemy lines, or some hero trying to avoid the dragon. I laid on my stomach and looked up the hill to the school. There were no teachers now. The windows of the one-story brick construction were entirely boarded up. I thought to myself that would be a dandy place for someone like the Courier to hide. Then, I wondered why I used the word 'dandy.' What was I doing here? Was I just here to play pretend like I did when I was young or was I really hunting this man that might have a key to Rausch and finding my wife.

I reached into my right pocket and wrapped by hand around the .38 there. Without putting my hand on the trigger I just squeezed the handle and felt that reassurance that I'd received the day I bought it. No, I was not here to play.

Unlike I used to do, when I would run up directly to the back double-doors of the school in order get in line and shuffle like a prisoner back into the place, I kept to the edge of the woods and tried to stay lay. I moved in ten yard increments looking at the school and trying to spot a hint of movement. Of course, two crows on the roof of the building had some fun distracting me, but I kept going.

Where the school and the woods came the closest together, the southwest corner of the building, I switched from the cover of the woods to the cover of the building. I took a breath and thought about where the entrances were. I knew the layout like the back of my hand still having spent five years there and even many more away. I thought the best way in would be around the other side of the building through the cafeteria. The problem with that plan was that it was the longest distance from me at the opposite corner of the school. Plus, the cafeteria was big, that meant noisy.

I'd just have to pick a random wing. The school had six main wings, one administrative, the other five dedicated to each grade. If the courier was here, or even if he was based here and was out at the moment, he could be in any of them. I had a one in six chance of not walking in on him. I picked third grade.

[^28]: The loose threads abounded that Saturday. Just as I was walking through the woods, the phone rang. I was glad it did it then. I'd forgotten I had it. Had it gone off where I thought I was going, it might have been bad news. It was Agent Cobb.

    Cobb: `It's me. You're not going to want to hear this.`  

    Me: I can tell you it's not going to be the strangest thing that's happened today.

    Cobb: `What? Anyway, doesn't matter. We've looked everywhere for this Paul Nolan. People haven't seen him in weeks.`  

    Me: Well, he did have a stroke not too long ago. Are you sure he's not lying in a ditch somewhere?

    Cobb: `Huh. Didn't think you'd be so concerned.`  

    Me: Sorry. Not concerned. I just need to hear something concrete. The fact that you can't find might mean something, it might not.

    Cobb: `You're starting to sound too much like me. Anyway, doesn't matter. I checked with the three local hospitals down here. There's no record of any Paul Nolan having a stroke.`  

    Me: Okay. Do you think he lied about having a stroke?

    Cobb: `It gets you time, space, I don't know. But it doesn't add up. He didn't report himself. A doctor did; a doctor by the name of Hal Altmount—we looked. He doesn't exist.`

    Me: All right. Okay. What's next?

    Cobb: `We're on our way back to town. We'll be there in a couple of hours.`

    Me: Can we meet for more details?

    Cobb: `Definitely, there's more to tell. I'll call you when we get there.`