---
title: Meeting Ezra
---

Once I was "repaired" and had stitches and a bandage placed on my arm, Ezra came to me and granted me two things. He let me see Anna and Josie. I will not write in this nasty bit of tortured writing that's causing my family's imprisonment describing anything about that re-union. I won't sully such a beautiful moment. I leave it as an exercise to the reader to imagine what would happen when your family was kidnapped and kept away from you for twelve days. What would you do? Would you become a maniac and kill everyone who was keeping them captive? Would you? The only violent people I have ever known, know violence in a way that I simply do not. They might fight only to endanger the ones they love because they will not calculate the odds. If anything, I concentrate on probability and I have three chances in that regard. I was only absolutely ecstatic to see them and hold them. But I will not tell you more; not here. Perhaps later.[^34]

I was brought to a room in the house, a library of sorts. There was the man who called himself Ezra Enoch, sitting at a large desk. He had people around him; people pouring wine for him, people guarding doors, people bringing me into the room. When I saw him, it was all I could say but, "Ezra."

He leaned on his elbows on the desk, and said, "Do you really know who I am? I wonder. You seem so cut off from the Dream."

Still in my courier clothes, I told him, "No. I am not so cut off as you think. I've brought you something."

"We told you precisely what to bring! Why do you keep—"

But I shout, "You want this! You need this!" His guards edged toward me.

Ezra waved his guards off. "What is it?"

I stepped toward the desk and laid the artifact upon it. I lay it down with the clunk of heavy metal. It was the watch of Nager Ada. "Here," I said, "It's yours. I don't want it."

Ezra sat up. "This is the watch?"

I said, "We have both looked for it, and the truth is, I can't be entirely sure. But, the evidence I've collected over the years tells me it is. It's the right age, and if you're like me, you'll recognize it. The markings are correct for the time. The paint—it's a dye from the early days of Darius the great and the beginnings of the city of Hormirzad. A batch of Indigo with coal was one of the few dyes that were known from that region at the time."

Ezra picks up the watch. He scans it from every angle. He lets his fingers trace over every bevel. "This is shocking," he says.

"It's yours."

"And it's not another one of your spy devices?"

"I wouldn't..."

Then he looks at me with heat in his eyes, "This may be true, and I *will* find out, but this does not get you out of anything."

"Yes, I know. That's not why I brought it."

"You're not with us though."

"I don't know who you are! Who is Rausch!?"

Ezra takes his legs off the desk at which he is sitting and says, "Oh." He stands and walks over to me. "Is that all you were concerned about?" He pauses, looks over the smooth emptiness of his desk. He takes his time. Then, he looks up at me, and says, "Now there are only two things you don't understand. Rausch is indeed one." He looks at me to see my reaction. I don't believe there is one. Ezra smiles. "Rausch is everywhere around you. Rausch is a welcome way to the place where we all want to go; and I am certain that you, Allen Worthington—or can I call you Reza?—I prefer that name. Who are you?"

I say, "I'm not Reza Bahadir. Reza Bahadir is not someone that you want to meet."

Ezra stands and walk around the desk and pulls out a .45 and pushes it into my face. "I'm very certain that you are wrong." He takes the gun out of my face. "I think you've blocked it somehow. I think you are the Nomad, and that you've been alive forever and I want to know the secret. If you aren't Reza then you knew him and you've carried on his work. Or... perhaps you knew Rausch before I came to know it."

I sit stiff in the chair I am in. I look at him, "I've indeed blocked it. It's best for everyone that it's blocked. You are using or... forcing forces you really do not understand."

"You're going to keep writing about it until I find out what I want. If you don't understand Reza, you don't understand what I want. And now that we have you in the comfort of out new city, I can tell you that the time limit is off. You're not going anywhere until I have what's in that head of yours."

"I think that if you don't understand Reza, then you don't understand what you want. You *do* remember the story of the Calathat?"

"A magical globe that grants wishes? Of course I know that story. A fable."

"A fable with a meaning. You have the watch of Nager Ada. I've given it to you. It's the only place to start. You have to sleep to accomplish any of what you are looking for. I can't fight you; just sleep. Uh... look at the watch, change it to what you want. It could be this whole house. Any room could be where you you want to go. It's all here... here in Hormirzad."

"Even when you utter the name, I can see your lack of faith; of vision. No, my world is precisely where I want it to be. I have the watch of Nager Ada. I am Rausch. And now, I have Reza Bahadir. All the pieces are falling into place. I even have a secret weapon."

"You don't have to threaten my wife and—"

"You see? You lack vision. Your wife and child are not my secret weapon—that wouldn't be a secret would it?"

"Even if I tell you what you want; you won't like it. It's information that won't further what you're attempting to do here."

"And what do you think I'm attempting to do here?"

"You're trying to rebuild Bandar Abbas—the mystical one—the dream palace."

"See. You don't know. I've got a grander idea." Ezra paces behind his desk. "I've got a vision even more grand than anything that..." he lowers his hand and points at me, "even the great Reza Bahadir ever realized."

"I just don't understand why; or at least I don't understand your methods."

"What needs to be understood. Bandar Abbas—Hormirzad—was the center of dreaming in the world. Nager Ada had followers—many of them. Hormirzad had an incredible concentration of dreams, because that was where after language, and after agriculture, and after the creation of the very idea of culture began, after Darius, and after Alexander, that was where the truth of the lucid world was realized."

"If that's true, then I need something from you. I need a way to commune with Reza. He's not here right now. He hasn't been with me for a long time. So I need something..."

"You've communed with Reza." Ezra reaches into a drawer in his desk and pulls out a stack of printed paper. "I've read everything you've written and everything that others have written and I've even read better translations than yours—mine."

"Pursuing Reza is dangerous. I found that out for myself. So, if you need me to give you want you want, I need something that you have. You've explored the legends, possibly, even more than I have. So give me something so that I can commune with Reza again."

"Oh, I'll do that and more."

Next: [Waking Rebecca](http://thedesperatecase.calepin.co/chapter-16-waking-rebecca.html)

[^34]: I will say this, Josie told me, "They are in love with you; there must be some weapon there."

    And Josie was right. I had brought something with me, against all their commands. I had brought a watch—a pocket watch. I believed, at the time, that it was a great weapon against what I had barely begun to percieve as the threat against my family. I did not bring a gun. I did not bring a knife. I brought a pocket watch. Mock me if you will, but wait.

    Reza has said many times that the desire for immortality in anything but the present moment can only yield a tear in the mind that seeks immortality in two infinite directions. The attempt to travel to both cannot be suppresed, and as the mind travels over greater distances, it becomes entirely lost. Like Nager Ada, who spoke through the ages to commune with Reza, the loss of the mind in the dream relieves one of need for comfort or grounding in reality. Reality becomes worthless, the dream becomes more valued, and in the dream, the past and the future become null and void and desire takes over. What time it is matters less than what time do you want it to be? It is the desire that eats one from the inside, for if the desire succeeds, all hope in the present is lost forever. The mind slowly traps itself in a smaller and smaller space of time that is dictated then, only by desires. Desire makes years vanish even when we experience it linearly. The wraith comes then, the mind is corrupted, and reality becomes the nightmare because it is the harsh light of all the pain created by the desire in the dream.

    The watch. The watch was just a measuring tape; a way to figure out how deluded this cult leader was. (Admittedly, at the time I decided to bring the watch with me, I thought it would measure the delusion of Rausch, but still.) You know, if I watched him or her or it gush over the watch like Gollum and his Precious, I thought I might have a chance of convincing him of other things. How prepared was this nut job to face-off with a man who called himself Reza and then commanded him? Unfortunately, for me, Ezra was not such a maliable individual. He had built this cult of Reza and he wasn't about to let it be wrested from him. His followers though? That I wondered more about.