---
title: Epilogue
---

I'm looking out my office window at a tree that has buds; I think it's a Dogwood. It's good to be here, in March. It's good to be back teaching my English classes, although these days when a student asks me "what's the point?" I have a hard time parsing my answer. What's the point. What's the point in writing anything? It will al definitely rot. It will all succumb to entropy. In that there is no point. And the very real idea that it can create a cancer like the cult that kidnapped my wife and child; what is there to say about that? So, what is the point?

I have neither answered that question, nor have I stopped writing.

I do know that Reza Bahadir, whoever he was or is, was right: Witness is necessary. Dreams are our minds at work on problems and in that they are simulations. But then, I think too, that the whole of our Universe and the many Universes that surround us are also simulations. It bothers me that what is "right" in our life can be different in our dreams. It signifies to me that we are not one. I think we are many. I think we are connected consciousness in a lab. But, that's for me. Dream freely, and decide for yourself.

Samantha Cobb had a lot of questions—still has a lot of questions—and I answered them all as honestly as... no. I answered them honestly. I told her everything that I saw. That doesn't mean that I know what happened. Truth is a thing like an asymptote. You can get ever closer but you can never get there. Truth—with a capital T—is everyone's and therefore no one's. I know what happened to me. I know what I saw. And I know what condition I witnessed it in, but I don't know how it could've been. I hesitate to even write the word wraith—I hesitate now. I didn't before because that is what I saw. I saw shadows attack men and tear them apart. I saw sleepers desperate to awaken and I saw them take vengeance on the ones who had forced them to sleep when they wanted to awaken. I know what happened to Paul. And I still think about that. I think a lot about that. With the sounds of Josie and Anna in the other room laughing, I am both thinking about him and them. I am grateful and horrified to know what capabilities I have.

* * *

Samantha Cobb debriefed me, although that is a kind way to put it. She was sure that the whole of the cult was mine; that I created the menace. I don't entirely disagree with her. It was John Shaffer who wrote to me those many years. He had come across my early work because a friend of mine, who shall remain nameless, liked the writings of Reza Bahadir and photocopied them and left them around in coffee houses as some kind of performance art. They were copied and changed, as things are want to do. They were re-written. Many of my original intentions were distorted and turned into theory. Agent Cobb showed me many of the publications. A lot of them were inscrutable to me. In all of them I saw some sense of the original story, but then, many of them made references to things I had never thought. Horimirzad. If I knew that word, ever, then it is lost on me. Maybe that is because I am not who I am, but who I have been.

Rebecca's face, when she woke up, that still haunts me.

And sometimes, in the middle of the night, when I am dreaming, I am in the hallway that does not end, but I do finally see a window. It's the window in the bedroom where I sleep (for now) and I wake up or I am already awake and I look at the window and there is a beam of pure moonlight shining through it and something... some pale arm passes through it—moves to the shadows.

I'm asleep or I'm not, but that shadow will not leave me. I wonder if it will leave me in a prison cell. I think it won't. I think it will always be there. Tomorrow I will tell Samantha Cobb where the body of Paul Nolan is. I know what will happen next and it will be... it will not be that terrifying staircase with the void on either side.