Chapter 3

## In which Able meets someone new.

As he approached he saw that the digging figure was an old woman in a red cloak. Able wasn't sure how to start an interaction. He generally only spoke when spoken to. With his feet crunching on the rock, she must have heard him coming, but she did not look up. He stood still for several more moments, and then, "Hello. Could you tell me where I am?"

Without looking up, she said, "Did you know that Jupaeter ate one of his children?"

Able was struck silent by the unexpected question.

"Do you even know who Jupaeter is?"

"Yes. Jupaeter ate Levy, his son, the shoemaker. He ate him whole."

"You know that, do you?"

"My father told me." 

"Jupaeter's the sky. And he wouldn't take kindly to you dashing about on whatever that contraption of yours is."

"I... I couldn't really help it," Able said with a shrug.

She stopped digging and looked at him surprised.  "You couldn't help it?"

"Not really."

Finally, the old woman looked up, directly at Nip. "I suppose it has a mind of its own, hmm?"

Able just shrugged again.

The old woman furrowed her brow and slowly pulled herself up from the ground, bringing her digging instrument up as a cane. She is so hunched over that she is almost at eye level with Able.  "So how do you feel about Jupaeter eating Levy?"

"Seems sad."

She raises her makeshift cane and pokes it in Nip's direction—Nip flits back away—"And how did you come by such a thing?"

"I made it."

Bringing her cane down, and stroking her chin with her other hand, she closes one eye and looks Able up and down. "I find that unlikely."

Able was shocked, but replied, "It's very true." He pulled out his sack with the other mistakes, and poured them on the ground. "That one," pointing to Nip, "is Nip. These other two are Po and Ka."

"Ha ha! They have names, do they?"

"It seemed... appropriate? To name them?"

"Maybe. Have you eaten?"

"Not recently."

"Then, I suggest we go inside and eat and talk, little one."

"My name is Able."

"Oh, it has a name too!? Well, my name is Ghendra." She turned to walk away, paused, and turned back, "That is not my only name, but it's the only one you need to know."

* * *

The inside of Ghendra's home was crowded tight, filled with a hodge-podge of knick-knacks and thingamabobs, all piled and stacked and pushed into corners in no particular order or pattern. She cleared out an area and a cleared off a chair and offered it to Able to sit. Able picked up Po and set him in his lap as Ka rolled around the base of the chair, bumping into things. Nip had stayed outside. Once seated, there was silence for a time until Able began asking questions, and he found that once he'd begun, he had no end of them in mind.

He asked about the beetle. It was some kind of "moisture collector" and had something to do with gathering water and some other things that Able didn't quite understand. He asked about the hives and was told that they were greenhouses—houses for plants. He remarked that they were not green, and she replied that they were on the inside, as he would see later. First, she needed to eat, and she lay a wooden bowl of stew of mushrooms on the table. Po, had been bouncing on Able's lap, seemingly wanting up onto the table, so Able lifted him up and let him roam about there. All eyed the stew. It was nothing like the food Able's father made, but it must be for eating. Able stared curiously as Ghendra put spoonfuls of the stuff into her mouth.

After a time, Ghendra finished her bowl of stew and burped.  She pushed it away from herself. "Now it is time for you to answer some of my questions, little one. How did you come to acquire these little friends of yours?" Able explained that he had not acquired them but had made them from leftover material from his father's brundlex. He wasn't supposed to make them. He told Ghendra what had happened with his father and how it had brought him here. Mostly, she listened, but at one point she mumbled, "Witless old fool." Able was not sure of whom she was speaking. As she asked more questions, Po made his way around the table near here, veering away when she first reached out to touch it. Able pet Po and said, "It's fine Po; she's a friend." And after that, Po allowed Ghendra to poke him and roll him over to examine him.

"I imagine, then, that you have built other mechanicals like this one, but they were different, no? More like my beetle—as you called it, yes?"

"Yes."

"But these three that travel with you, what is different?"

Able squirmed in his seat, unsure of the answer. "I didn't—or I don't—tell them what to do."

"Yes." Ghendra said with a sigh, "Such a boring life has a mechanical that has an intent—a purpose. I suppose it is good to have a purpose—not everything does—but then a purpose does cause one to repeat actions over and over. Can you imagine being such a machine?"

Able thought on this for a while. He did not know of any purpose that he had or had been given. His father spoke of their purpose at times, but Able never felt it in his body. "I guess not."

Ghendra smiled and arose from the table and said, "Let's check in on the garden."

* * *

Once inside the greenhouse, Able felt the strangest sensation—that his surface was covered in some substance. It made the air feel heavy and cooled him. All around him now, he could see all manner of pipes that shot up from the ground, split in any number of directions and ended in bright green plates. He was baffled. He'd never seen so much color, let alone felt such a sense of life. Ghendra explained that the thing he felt on his skin was moisture—very thin water—and that the many things he saw were called plants, and that though they did not move or talk, they were indeed alive, and in fact, she pointed out, they tended to make more of themselves. They needed water and light, and beyond that, they would "do their own thing." In fact, she pointed out, the moisture that he felt was, in fact, their breath. Able marveled at their beauty.

As Ghendra and Able shuffled down winding paths between all the plants, Ghendra spoke, "It is said, that a long time ago, back when the world was well-balanced, these plants grew *everywhere*. They did not need houses to thrive. They didn't need mechanicals to find water for them, for water was everywhere, said to even fall from the sky. That was when the council was whole. That was when the codification of the world was clear. But, as you know, from digging up tablets with your father, the codification has been broken for some time."

Able followed Ghendra as she walked, but didn't really follow her speech. *Water falling from the sky?*

Even more amazing, some of the plants had small bowls of bright colors, seemingly folded together out of paper. Ghendra called these flowers.

"Look at how much color you've created! It's fantastic!"

"I didn't really create it. I built the houses and gathered the water and planted the seeds. The rest was up to Jupaeter's wife, Gaea."

"I did not know that Jupaeter had a wife."

"No doubt. Many believe she left this world long ago. But that's not entirely true. She is merely sleeping."

The pair stayed in the garden for a time, Ghendra tending to the plants, and Able examining them all, breathless at the sight of yellow and blue and pink and green.

* * *

After a time, Ghendra and Able returned to the house. Able sat at the table again and Ghendra joined him, picking up Po to examine it. It chittered with nervousness as she held him. "This one makes me curious." She spoke to Po, "Your brothers seem content to absorb things and change, but you—you've been remembering things haven't you?" Po shook in Ghedra's thin fingers, seemingly spinning on the inside, until she set him down. Once on the table, Po rolled in a circle and then, three small feet unfolded from him, setting on the table to hold it still. Then, a split formed in its center, and a section opened up revealing a gem that was filled with light. The light stretched up from Po forming many dots that danced and coalesced into a picture of Ghendra's own face. "Oh my." A three dimensional blue and green light picture of Ghendra rotated above Po.

Able was stunned. "He's never done that before."

"I see." Ghendra got up from the table and made her way over to a stack of papers and books.

Able reached out across the table and grabbed Po and dragged it over in front of him. Po chirped and suddenly the light picture danced and changed into a picture of Able. Able laughed and said, "Po, how come you never did this before?" Once more the light changed and danced, turning deep purple, and creating the visage and Able's father's face. "Oh," said Able, sadly.

Ghendra set a heavy tome down on the table and let it fall open. She grabbed Po once again and turned it upside down. Po made a churlish sound and the light spread out over the book. But after a moment the light fell flat on the book and the letters and characters began to also glow. Po made many, many noises, all in succession. And then, after a moment, light from the characters in the book faded, and Po uttered a low bell sound. Ghendra laughed and turned the page, whereupon the whole process happened again.

"What is he doing?"

Ghendra smiled and looked at Able, again turning the page, "He's eating." She picked Po up after the third page turn and turned him feet-down on the table. "Now, show us."

Po's light danced about and in as many colors as the rainbow, he quickly illuminated a series of shapes and objects—a castle, a mesa, some tools, a wave, creatures—all so fast that Able could barely make out what they were.

"My, my," whispered Ghendra.

"I don't understand," said Able, his brow furrowed. "How is he eating pictures when there are none in your—" Able looked at the book on the table.

"Book," Ghendra said. "It is a book and it contains information."

"What is that?"

"Information is many things, Able. The world is filled with it, really. Your name, for instance, is information."

"My name?"

"Yes. Just a moment." Ghendra got up again and knocked a stack of papers and books to the ground. She picked up little Po and set him on the messy pile. "Have at it, little one." And Po's feet grew longer as he held himself over the jumbles of characters and began rapidly tracing them with lights.

Turning back to Able, Ghendra said, "If I wanted to talk about someone in the world, how would I do it if no one had names? I can't speak to you about my plants because even though they have names, you don't know them. But a name gives things a kind of uniqueness. Names are information. They aren't the only kind of information—there are many kinds of information. Po, it would seem, eats information. You and I also eat information, but we do it differently. In fact, the way you and I do it is even different. And when we want to remember or trade information, we have to talk about it. Po, he can simply show us what he's thinking."

Able nodded. "I see," he said, although he didn't really.

Ghendra made a quizzical face and then asked Able, "What do you feed your little mistakes?"

Able reached into his sack and pulled out the smaller bag of electrum dust. "It comes from my Father's well. He says it's just dirt but I call it electrum."

Picking up the bag, Gendra removed a handful of the shimmering dust and let it pour from her hand back into the bag. She set it down for a moment and got up, walked to an armoire, and pilfered through some drawers. Retrieving a small tube, she returned to the table. She helped the tube top to her eye and once again pulled a handful of the substance out of the sack and poured it back. Able could see her eye without the tube grow wide. She removed the tube from her eye and blinked a few times, removing a charm from her mind. "Most people in this world of ours are fools, Able." She handed the bag back to him. "They would think this substance useless, as your father did. But it is special—very special. And you, since you know what to do with it, and I assume, how to find it, are also very special."

Able looked at the bag, noticing how light it had become. "Yes. I was thinking that, maybe after my father—maybe he wouldn't be mad anymore—and I could go home to get more."

"No. Your father is also a fool. You should seek out others like yourself. There are those that can do what you do, and they can show you more." She reached over and picked Po up and said it on the table again, where's legs shrunk down, and where the light again formed a picture, this time of a brundlex. "Bah," said Ghendra, "a primitive mechanical at best." She leaned in close to Po and said, "Show me the Ultracircus."

Po quivered and whirred and the picture of the brundlex transformed into an eight-legged machine with a plate on top of it, and on top of the plate, castle walls surrounding tall glass buildings. Though the image stayed in one place, the city on legs seemed to walk through the air. Ghendra spoke again, "You must find this place, Able. You must seek out your kind."

"I don't know. Is it far?"

"Who knows? I do not. It moves and I don't. However, I know someone who can start you in the right direction—a friend, of sorts. But I think he would be interested in helping you. His name is Gef. He is a Dustman. You will find him near the Delphine's run.

"I don't know. I should go home. I need to help my mother."

"Your mother, Evo; I do not think there is anything you can do for her, Able."

Able wondered how Ghendra knew his mother's name, but not for long. "I don't know."

Ghendra made a bed out of blankets for Able. He lay down and watched as, across the room, Po continued to shine lights on books and papers and sometimes make squeals and beeps. Ka rolled over next to Able and nuzzled him. Able asked him, "What do you do?" to which Ka replied by purring. Able smiled and drifted off to sleep.

In the morning, Able gathered a now quiet and spherical Po and Ka and his sack. He crept about the house and saw Ghendra sleeping in another room. He made his way out of the house and looked up to see Nip hovering far above in the dusky morning light. He waved Nip down, and said to him. "Take me home, please, Nip."

* * *

When they arrived at his father's house, Able, from the sky could see his brother outside digging in the ground. He had dug a large, long hole. Nip set Able down away from the house, near a large outcropping of tablets where Able could see the house. As his brother continued digging, Able's father came out of the house with something in his arms—something wrapped in sheets. In his heart, Able knew what was in his father's arms—who was in his father's arms.

Able watched as his father lowered the body into the hole. The two men stood quietly over it, Able's father having removed his hat, speaking, though Able could not hear him. Then, after a time, the two men began filling in the hole. Po and Ka made soft noises in the sack. Nip hovered close by. Able grew immensely sad and wished he could cry.

* * *

"You're going to need another name, little one," Ghendra said.

Able had returned to Ghendra's house in the afternoon and she could see from his posture what he had discovered. She felt poorly for him and hugged him. But she also knew that it would only be days before the caravan would leave at the next approach of Delphine, and then it would be many months before the traders built a new bridge and returned to Idex Mortez.

"My name is Able."

"No, no. A surname. With it, you can add more information to yourself. You will be called Summary. When anyone asks, you can tell them you are Able Summary."

"Um, ok."

"You'll find the caravan to the east of here. You'll know them when you see them. There, among them, you will find Gef. Tell him that I sent you. And perhaps, don't show him or the rest your mistakes—not right away. Don't show anyone the mistakes until you are sure the time is right. You'll know when."

"Gef has been searching for some time for an object called the Cyclopedia. Tell him you can help him find it in exchange for taking you out of Idex Mortez."

"But I don't even know what that is."

"It won't matter; not right away. Just know that he will help you, and then you will be on your way. And remember that Po knows things."