# Chapter 5

## In which Able frees a Dustfish.

Gef, Able and Arthra (Po, Ka, and Nip, too) ride away from the rest of the caravan. Even over the scrabbly badlands that they are in, Able can look behind and see the remnants of Delphine's desrtuction. "Where are we going?" Able asked. "Why aren't we going with the others?"

Gef replied, "We're going where they're going, but we're going a slightly different route." Gef turned in his seat to look at Able through his mask, "I don't want them getting too much more of a look at you."

"Why?"

Gef laughed. "By the clock! You have no idea what you are, do you, kid?"

Able thought about this. "Of course I do."

"Okay then, tell me."

"I'm a boy."

Gef laughed again, harder this time. "Who in the world would make something like you? I just can't figure."

Able had no idea how to reply to this.

"Do you know what a Noman is?"

"No."

"Well, you ain't it."

They rode on for a while in silence. In fact, the silence was immense to Able. With the rumble of Delphine growing in the distance, only questions hung in the air; that and the sound of Arthra's feet scraping at the dirt. Finally, Gef spoke again. "I really don't know how to tell you this, Able—I don't know if I *should* tell you. It seems nice to me that you're ignorant, because the world is not going to like you, Able. Not at all."

After a time, Arthra began descending down a large hill. She wound back and forth, her body curving into a long S. As they descended the hill, small gray things began appearing on and around the rocks. "What's that?" Able asked.

"Lichen." Gef answered. After a moment he said, "They're kinda like those plants that Ghendra had... sort of. At any rate, Arthra eats them, and when we get down to the bottom of this valley, we're gonna give her a little break."

Once in the ravine, Able noticed that the temperature had dropped. There was a small trickle of water running down through the rocks and even small spots of fuzzy green. There were more lichen and they varied in shapes and sizes. Some were almost as tall as he was! Gef brought Arthra to a halt and hopped off. He signaled to Able to do the same. He also removed some bags from off Arthra's back and then gave her a pat and she began to wander away.

Gef sat down on a rock and took off his hat and mask. Able still had his sack with his mistakes and the fruits and vegetables. He stood and looked at the creek. In the desert where his father lived, water came from far underneath the ground. To see it spilling everywhere like this seemed like a terrible waste.

"I'm going to have to make you a disguise," Gef said.

Able turned to look at Gef.

Gef knew immediately Able had no idea what a disguise was, so he just said, "You can't go around looking like you do. You need to cover up your face."

"Okay."

"Ever heard of the Dust Men?"

"No."

Gef chuckled. "They're a legend in these parts. Pirates... uh... raiders who can live on the Silt Sea somehow. I dress like a Dust man so that people mostly leave me be. I'm gonna dress you up like one, too, okay?"

Able shrugged, "Okay."

Gef cocked his head in wonder. "So, this mother and father of yours; they drank water?"

"Yes."

"And did you do things for them?"

"My mother was very sick. I built special brundelexes that helped her to do things like breathe."

"I see."

"She loved me very much."

"She did? She said that?"

"Yes."

"That's... that's wonderful, Able. You should never, ever forget that—that you were loved." Gef sat back on the rock and paused. He shook his head. "I can't say that for myself."

"What about your mother?"

"No. I have no mother, Able. The truth is, you don't either, but... well, I suppose you do in some sense... maybe in the best sense."

"I *have* a mother." Able looked at the ground. "I had a mother."

"What do you mean?"

"She's gone now."

Oh, Able. I'm so sorry." After another long moment, "That's why you're out here."

Able sat down cross-legged on the ground, letting go of his sack. "Yes. My father hates me."

"Why?"

"He said I was a heretic. He said... he said I do things that I shouldn't. But I can't help it!"

"I know, I know. That's the thing Able. You're parents—they're Noman. They aren't like you and me. They... work differently. We, well, it's awful, but you're going to hear this sooner or later. Better that you hear it from me. The nomans, they call us 'clockworks'. It's terrible. It's not true. We are nothing like clocks. We are so much more than that. But they hate us, so they reduce us to the simplest thing they can think of it. It makes it easier for them to destroy us. They don't have to feel anything when they do it. Does any of that make any sense?"

Able just stared. He put his head in his hands.

"What we really are is synthezoids. We don't eat, we don't drink water. We can think differently than the nomans. We can do things they can't. We feed off the light and crysoprase. And they hate us for it, and they blame us for the way the world is."

"What's wrong with the way the world is?"

"Maybe nothing. Maybe everything. It just used to be different is all." Gef began digging around in his bags. "Like I said, we're gonna put together something for you to wear." He chuckled. "You'll be the funniest little Dust Man anyone's ever seen!"

"Can I go look at the water."

Gef smiled. "Able, you can do whatever you want now. You never have to ask me."

Able wasn't sure how he felt about that. It felt strange. But, he got up and walked down to the water.

* * *

The dirt all around the water was brimming with electrol! Able was so happy to find more to feed his mistakes. He ran back to his sack by Gef and got out his sack of electrol. He heard Po make a low worried sound, but didn't dare say anything in front of Gef. The mistakes seemed to understand that they needed to stay quiet. He went back down to the creek and began gathering more of the glittering dust.

While digging, Able saw something very strange. It was metallic and shiny and squirmy. He dug around it and finally was able to unearth the whole thing. It thrashed in his hands. It had eyes and a mouth and thin panels all over its body.

He took it over to Gef. "What is this?"

Gef looked up from the mask he was working on and said, "That's a Dustfish."

Able looked at the dustfish, which had stopped squirming quite so much. He thought it was beautiful.

"It'll die if it doesn't stay in the mud, Able. You should put it back."

"I want to keep it. It's so pretty."

"It's cruel, Able. A dustfish need moisture to breath."

"Oh," said Able. He took the dustfish over to his sack, reached in and pulled out Ka, keeping his body between Ka and Gef. Then he walked back down to the water. "Ka, I want you to take care of this new friend." Able took some of the electrol dust and spread it on the dustfish. He took Ka and helped him expand to the size of the dustfish and then pushed the two together and set them down in the water.

Ka furzeled and sucked in water and changed his color from yellow to blue. It grew a band around itself and two small pipes that begin pulling in air, making bubbles in itself. It also grew two small half-globes that whirled and allowed Ka to hover up out of the water and come to Able's eye-level. Able peered inside Ka and saw the dustfish swimming. "What should we call you?"

Suddenly, from behind, Able heard Gef shout, "In Gaea's name! What is that!?"

Able was startled and turned suddenly to Gef. "I-I'm sorry! Don't punish me! Don't make me break it."

Gef immediate squatted down and put his hands on Able's shoulders. "Able, no. No. It's fine. I'm just—I'm just amazed is all. I'm not mad. I promise." Gef looked past Able at the dustfish floating in the air inside Ka. "It's just... how in Gaea's name did you do that?"electrol