# Chapter 6

## In which Able and Gef travel to the outpost of Kinton Station

"I have no idea how we're going to hide this thing," was Gef's main concern after everything settled down with the new floating aquarium that was Ka. Able had decided then that the dustfish's name was Rolly, and had begun referring to the whole contraption—dustfish and Ka—as Ka'Rolly. But Gef had other concerns, like what in the world was it that Able had done to create such a thing. Once the jig was up wth Ka, Able showed him Nip and Po as well and Gef was beside himself.

Able showed him that he could fly with Nip and showed him how Po knew things. Po happily showed Gef his own image and Gef just laughed and laughed. He had never seen a complete picture of himself like that, not in 200 years. A little entity like Po could help so much in restoring the Cyclopedia! He wondered if Ghendra had really known what she had sent him. Gef wondered that especially because the boy would be not only be useful, but downright revolutionary.

And Able had never had the chance to tell anybody how he made his mistakes! Once he started explaining it to Gef he couldn't stop. He had never talked so much in his life. The only odd thing was that when he showed Gef the bag of electrol, Gef confessed that it just looked like dirt. Whatever it was that Able was seeing in it, Gef could not see it.

Gef had only heard about such things coming from the monks of the Ultracircus and that was total legend—children's fairy tales. But there was no denying what he was seeing. Able was somehow affecting the code of the world.

Gef attended to Able first. Like himself, he wrapped Able in linen bandages everywhere and gave him a belt and a small robe he'd sewn together. Arthra had shed some time back and Gef had kept some pieces of her chitin. He used an old piece to fashion a kind of helmet for Able and some very small pieces for goggles. The rest of Able's mask came from various leftover brundlex pieces he'd found in his travels. When he was done, Able did indeed look like a very small Dustman. It would have to work.

Fo Ka'Rolly, Gef decided to fashion a long cloak that could drape over the shell that Ka had formed around the dustfish and then he made a face out of more brundlex parts and hung it on the shell. He fashioned a kind of body out of lots of junk and hung it off Ka's floating sphere, like a scarecrow. When Ka'Rolly floated along, he sort of looked like a big-headed synthezoid in a cloak. Sort of. Again, it would have to do.

It was extremely hard explaining to Able that most synthezoids had masters, that they weren't free, and that synthezoids that were free were hunted and destroyed. Able just had no way to conceive of such things. But the boy synthezoid seemed to understand that he must keep his identity a secret, and that they should act like Ka'Rolly was a pet, not a friend—just around Nomans. Finally, Able needed a Dustmen name. Gef explained that the Dustmen had a sort of language of their own that sounded a lot like the movement of the Silt Sea. They had a word for that which was unique which was "hazkerets". Able and Gef agreed to shorten it to "Haz".

"Wait," Able said. "Your name is Gef. Is that your real name?"

"No. I've had several names."

"What's your real name?"

"Truth is Able, I forgot it a long time ago. I've always hoped that if I could piece the Cyclo back together, I might be able to find it, but who knows."

* * *

Able could see the outpost in the distance. Much like his father's misshapen shack under the mesa, the buildings silhouettes were haphazard and jagged, pushing out of the scrabble of the badlands like bad teeth. He could see many other pedes gathered around its edges. It looked like many of the other members of the trader's caravan had made it this far, though Able still worried greatly about the ones that maybe didn't. He also noticed a great many giant flags billowing from different camps and around the outpost. When he asked, Gef explained that these represented crews from various far-off cities, the places these traders would eventually return to when they had acquired what they were after. Cities, Gef explained, were like the outpost, but much, much bigger.

"Like the Ultracircus?" Able asked.

"Yeah, not that big. And most cities don't move around." Gef thought of the sky city of Uchava. "Most."

As they rode down the center street of the outpost, Able could practically feel the stares of the people milling about. Gef had explained that people were wary of Dustmen but they didn't hate them like synthezoids, so they were okay. "Trust me," Gef said, "they're more afraid of us than we should be of them."

The main drag of the outpost was very wide, offering accommodation too not just pedes, but all manner of other things—rigs with two legs, four legs and rigs with wheels and rigs with tracks. Sometimes rigs with wheels were pulled by things with legs. He didn't like that. Then again, he thought, he was riding on Arthra. Then again, she was so big, she must hardly notice. Able made a mental note to try and ask her some time.

Regardless, he was fascinated by every single rig that passed. They came to a big wide space that was filled with tables shaded by big pieces of fabric. Able smelled so many smells, he had a hard time processing any of them. There were smells like smoke, like flesh, like the fruits that Ghendra had given him; so many smells that they combined into a miasma that he couldn't even identify. As they moved closer, the scents would vacillate between delicious and then suddenly off-putting, nearing poisonous even.

They stopped and Gef hopped down off Arthra. Able did the same, sliding himself down her side with a rope attached to his "seat" (a bunch of blankets rolled and tied together with twine, strapped to Arthra with leather straps.) Ka'Rolly followed him, slowly hovering down to the ground. Gef rolled his eyes behind his mask. "Okay, look. You... uh... you *two* stay right here by Arthra. Just hang out. I'm going to go make some trades." As he was talking he brought down a crate off the backend of Arthra. He knew the curiosity regarding the market would be too much. "I need you to guard Arthra, okay? She needs you to stand watch."

Able nodded. Ka'Rolly beeped.

"Okay." Gef thought for a minute. "And do not let anyone see your other two, uh, mistakes?"

Able nodded.

"It's so weird you call them that. Have you ever thought about calling them something else?"

Able shrugged.

"Well, whatever. Guard Arthra, okay?"

"I will," said Able, mustering all the confidence he could.

With that, Gef walked away with the crate.

* * *

For an hour or so, nothing happened. Able watched rig after rig go by, observing the different forms of locomotion. Sometimes when one in particular had something new, Able would point it out to Ka'Rolly. "Look, that one's got a brundlex." Ka'Rolly would make a kind of wheezing whistle.

At one point, Able felt something brush up against his foot and he looked down to see a ball. At first he thought it might be Po, having left the "nest" he'd made on Arthra's back. He was about to admonish the object until he saw that, in fact, it was just a ball. He gingerly picked it up and showed it to Ka'Rolly who made a sound as if to say, "There it is." Able looked around to find where it came from and about a fifty meters off saw some children standing in a group staring at him. He bent down and with the ball between his legs, did his best to roll out back to them.

Ten minutes later Able found himself face-to-face with a girl from the group of children. She was chewing something. She looked at Able, who was shorter, and then up at Ka'Rolly who "stood" at two meters. After a moment of mutual staring, she said, "You're clockworks is weird."

Able looked up at Ka'Rolly, who looked down. From beneath his hooded head, his makeshift face peered out with a permanent, dumb smile on it. Able looked back to the girl and shrugged. "I guess he is."

The girl squinted her eyes and looked at Able again. "Are you a dust man?"

"Yes," Able said confidently. He was new to lying, but this one he knew.

The girl looked unsure. "You're a very small dust man. Are you a kid?"

Able had no idea how to reply. "I am a small dust man."

"But you're a kid."

Able gave up. "Yes."

"You can come play ball with us if you want."

Able really liked this idea, but Gef's words stuck. "I have to guard our pede."

"You can see it from where we are. We've been looking at it and you and your weird clockworks."

Able looked to Ka'Rolly for advice and the creature replied with a sound like, "I don't know. I'm a fish in a jar."

"Okay." Able turned to Ka'Rolly and in a kind of imitation of Gef he said, "I need you to stay here and guard Arthra."

Ka'Rolly sighed. If he could he'd rather play ball, too.

* * *

After trading fruits, vegetables, brundlex pieces, metal parts, and centipede chitin for bars of silicon and aluminum and a few tubes of argon, Gef heads away from the market to an alley on the outskirts of the outpost. There he enters a little shop filled from floor to ceiling with books, papers, stone tablets,  beads, jewelry, trinkets, and all manner of small animals (organic and inorganic) in small guided cages. Gef has to stop over piles and slide past stuffed shelves to make his way to the back. There's a counter and a young man seated at it. The young man looks up and it immediately terrified.

"Uh, yes, sir?"

Gef asks, "Is Wacamolo around?"

"Um. Yes!" The young man seems relieved to leave the counter and go in search of his master. A moment later he returns with an ancient bad noman with a wrinkled face and a long mustache. "Gef! You old rust bucket!" The old noman shakes Gef's hand with vigor. "I hate to tell you, but I haven't heard a thing about cycle relics since the last time you were here."

"That's okay Waca. I'm actually here about something else."

"Well, let's hear it."

"It's hard to explain, and it might even sound silly, but I have reason to believe I have something that should be delivered to the Ultracircus."

Wacamolo's right eyebrow raised high on his forehead. His left one followed while the right one went down again. "The Ultracircus?"

"Yeah."

"Are you crazy? Did you bust a circuit board? There's no such thing as the Ultracircus. It's a myth—a legend—a fairy tale for Gaia's sake!"

"See. I have reason to believe it's not."

"What?"

"I can't say."

Wacamolo shook his head and shrugged. "I mean, there's nothing. I have nothing to help you with that."

"The cyclo says that there are texo compasses that can locate it. Maybe we could figure out where one of those is located."

"A texo compass tuned to the Ultracircus? I can't say I've heard of that before. But if there's anybody who would know, I can think of one person."

"Yeah?"

"Baron Rollo Leocadia."

"The mad scientist!?"

Wacamolo nodded.

"The master of the city of Horn?"

Wacamolo just nodded again.

"Great." Gef put his face in his hand.

"Texo compasses are hard enough to come by. You know that. But a texo compass tuned to the Ultracircus?—only a scientist would know about such a thing."

"Well, prap. I don't know what else to do."

"Now hang on a moment. Getting into the city of Horn—*that* I might be able to help you with. C'mon back. Let's consult the board."

Gef rolled his eyes, but followed the old noman anyway. When they got to the back room, Wacamolo sat down on the dingy carpet in the center of the room and produced a wooden board made with many interlocking rings. Gef sat down cross-legged on the carpet across from Wacamolo and sighed. This i'ching stuff was hoodoo as far as he was concerned, but it was all he could get his hands on for the moment.

Wacamolo threw a number of sticks on the carpet and pushed them about. He rubbed his whiskery chin and thought. Then, after a moment he arranged all the rings on the board so that they all lay flat and he traced his finger across several symbols. Finally, he held the board out over the sticks and the rings began to move, each one rotating until it was at some angle perpendicular to the ground, some of them matching, others rotating until they were at opposite angles. "Hmm," said Wacamolo.

He read symbols off the board. "Southeast of the Horn, there is a... hollow... of tigers. There is a temple in that place. A temple of... water. The wind will show you the way and the entrance will be unlocked by... uh..."

Gef cocks his head. Old Wacamolo had done these kinds of readings before for him and sometimes they lead somewhere and sometimes they didn't, but he never stumbled over the meanings. "Unlocked by?"

"I don't know. This symbol and this pattern... I've never seen it before." He set the board down on the floor and used his hands to lift his backend to handwalk over to some books on the lowest shelf. He picked a book up and slid himself on the floor back over to the board. He flipped through the book looking, tracing pages with his index finger. "Here it is... Hmf."

"And?"

"I don't understand. It says the door will open by mistake."

Gef began quietly laughing.

Wacamolo looked about at the sticks. "I must have missed something. That does not make sense."

"Actually, Waca. That makes perfect sense to me." Gef kept laughing.

"What do you mean? How do you open a door by mistake?"

"I can't do it, but I know a guy."

"Most peculiar," said Wacamolo as Gef laughed and stood up.

Wacamolo followed after Gef as Gef nodded to the young man and left the shop. Out in the open air, the pair walked together towards the market. "I have to know what's going on, Gef! You can't just come here and tell me your suddenly seeking the Ultracircus and solve some mystery of *mine* and then leave me in the dark. You have to tell me what's this all about!"

"Waca, honestly, if I tell you it could put you in as much danger as I think I'm in. Something cam to mom out past Delphine's run. The Lady in Green sent it. Clearly, she means for me to find the Ultracircus. But who knows, it could be as much of a goose chase as the time you told me there were sections of the Cyclo in that old Arsenic mine. You remember that?"

"You can't hold me accountable for that. The winds were wrong and I merely wasn't taking into account—"

Wacamolo stopped talking as he and Gef rounded a corner and Gef came to a sudden halt, holding his hand out to stop Wacamolo. Across the way, Gef could see a crowd of children who were facing a man and a seven foot raptor. The man himself had Able by the hood of his poncho and was swatting at a bright red dodecahedron flitting about in the air and buzzing around his head.

Gef stareed and then sighed. "Son of a balrik."

* * *

electrolPlaying ball with the other children was the nicest thing Able had done in ages. It was fun! Sometimes they passed it around in order and sometimes they changed the order. Sometimes they tossed it and sometimes they kicked it. There didn't seem to be any rules. The others asked him lots of questions. He didn't like lying, so most of the time he would just answer with "I don't know." They asked him if he liked living on the Silt Sea and he didn't know, so he just said, "Not really." And when they asked him what he ate, he remembered Cal's warnings and decided he should eat something. He looked at Ka'Rolly across the wide street and said, "dustfish," and all the children moaned and grabbed their stomachs and pretended to be sick. He thought their reaction was really funny.

Able had completely lost track of time playing and talking when a long shadow fell across the group of children. They all looked up to the silhouette of a man on a large lizard with long back legs and short arms and big teeth. The raptor lowered  its head toward Able and took in a long sniff and then snorted hot air on Able. The man on the raptor said, "What in the dunes do we have here?"

The little girl who had first approached Able—her name was Rilla—spoke up. "He's a dust kid, sheriff!"

The sheriff adjusted himself in his saddle. "A dust kid? Well that's the first I've ever heard of such a thing."

Able grew worried and stood very still.

"Where's your tribe, dust kid?"

Able pointed to Arthra. The sheriff looked over at the large centipede and the very strange looking character in a cloak standing next to it. "That fella' in the cloak—he a friend o'yours?"

Able nodded.

The sheriff got down off of his raptor, which snarled as he did. "You don't say much, kid." He then squatted down to Able's level. "Now look, I know you raiders like to travel in groups, so where's the rest of ya'." The sheriff looked over his shoulder down the main thoroughfare. "Are they off hiding in the badlands until nightfall." He looked back at Able and poked him, "Huh?"

Just then and without warning, a siren came from the back of Arthra and in a moment had wailed it's bright, glowing red way across the street and into the sherif's face. Nip had busted out of the nest the moment the sherif's finger made contact with Able. He buzzed, blared, honked and bumped the sherif, who quickly stood up while grabbing Able by the back of his poncho. No sooner did the sheriff do that than Nip positioned himself directly between Able and the sheriff's face and let out a massive klaxon sound that made everyone in the group cover their ears.

As the sheriff dropped Able to cover his ears, Gef was already sprinting across the street. He slid to a stop near Able and swept him up. Without hesitating, he turned to Arthra and began running again. He moved like a raptor; even faster. As he and Able were piling on to Arthra and Nip had flown over with them, the sheriff gathered his wits enough to turn and see Ka'Rolly simply up and float onto the centipedes back. He looked utterly baffled, until with no other option left he reached behind his back and pulled out a long tube connected via a hose to his backpack. He shouted, "You hold it right there!"

As the sheriff scrambled back up onto his raptor and turned it toward the fleeing suspects, two more men on raptors appeared, both with weapons like the sheriff's. "Halt!" one of them yelled. But by then, Arthra was working up to her top speed and just like on Delphine's Run Bridge she was moving fast. The men on raptors gave chase and even went past the edge of Kinton station, but about five hundred meters out into the badlands it was clear they would never catch the pede as she easily danced and wound her way around massive boulders and underbrush.