# Chapter 6

## In which Able and Gef travel to the outpost of Dire Hollow

"I have no idea how we're going to hide this thing," was Gef's main concern after everything settled down with the new floating aquarium that was Ka. Able had decided then that the dustfish's name was Rolly, and had begun referring to the whole contraption—dustfish and Ka—as Ka'Rolly. But Gef had other concerns, like what in the world was it that Able had done to create such a thing. Once the jig was up wth Ka, Able showed him Nip and Po as well and Gef was beside himself.

Able showed him that he could fly with Nip and showed him how Po knew things. Po happily showed Gef his own image and Gef just laughed and laughed. He had never seen a complete picture of himself like that, not in 200 years. A little entity like Po could help so much in restoring the Cyclopedia! He wondered if Ghendra had really known what she had sent him. Gef wondered that especially because the boy would be not only be useful, but downright revolutionary.

And Able had never had the chance to tell anybody how he made his mistakes! Once he started explaining it to Gef he couldn't stop. He had never talked so much in his life. The only odd thing was that when he showed Gef the bag of electrum, Gef confessed that it just looked like dirt. Whatever it was that Able was seeing in it, Gef could not see it.

Gef had only heard about such things coming from the monks of the Ultracircus and that was total legend—children's fairy tales. But there was no denying what he was seeing. Able was somehow affecting the code of the world.

Gef attended to Able first. Like himself, he wrapped Able in linen bandages everywhere and gave him a belt and a small robe he'd sewn together. Arthra had shed some time back and Gef had kept some pieces of her chitin. He used an old piece to fashion a kind of helmet for Able and some very small pieces for goggles. The rest of Able's mask came from various leftover brundlex pieces he'd found in his travels. When he was done, Able did indeed look like a very small Dustman. It would have to work.

Fo Ka'Rolly, Gef decided to fashion a long cloak that could drape over the shell that Ka had formed around the dustfish and then he made a face out of more brundlex parts and hung it on the shell. He fashioned a kind of body out of lots of junk and hung it off Ka's floating sphere, like a scarecrow. When Ka'Rolly floated along, he sort of looked like a big-headed synthezoid in a cloak. Sort of. Again, it would have to do.

It was extremely hard explaining to Able that most synthezoids had masters, that they weren't free, and that synthezoids that were free were hunted and destroyed. Able just had no way to conceive of such things. But the boy synthezoid seemed to understand that he must keep his identity a secret, and that they should act like Ka'Rolly was a pet, not a friend—just around Nomans. Finally, Able needed a Dustmen name. Gef explained that the Dustmen had a sort of language of their own that sounded a lot like the movement of the Silt Sea. They had a word for that which was unique which was "hazkerets". Able and Gef agreed to shorten it to "Haz".

"Wait," Able said. "Your name is Gef. Is that your real name?"

"No. I've had several names."

"What's your real name?"

"Truth is Able, I forgot it a long time ago. I've always hoped that if I could piece the Cyclo back together, I might be able to find it, but who knows."

* * *

