# Chapter 7

## In which the crew makes their way into a hollow of tigers.

After Gef is sure they're no longer being followed, the crew finds a butte with lots of crags for them to get down into and make camp for the night. As they are setting up, Nip immediately flies to spot fifty meters over the camp site. Gef looks up at the gold and green glowing spot and shouts, "We really don't need a beacon telling people where we are!" Nip changes color to a very dark purple. "Well, that's... better." Gef looks to Able who is examining Po. "Can you not tell it to stay down here?"

Able looks to the twilight sky and says, "I can't tell *it* to do *anything*." Able was frustrated with Nip, yes, but that was the way the mistakes were made. They had their own wills. They took suggestions, not orders—especially Nip. With that, Able gave Po a hug. Po purred.

Having laid out some large rocks that emit a bright turquoise light, Gef sits on a makeshift stool and says, "Well that did not go as planned back in town, but I did manage to get us some information."

Able was excited at hearing the word information. He had not heard any information in a few days. He sat cross-legged on the ground with Po in his lap. Ka'Rolly flattened its fake body out and set down on the ground next to Able, who pulled the cloak back and pet Ka.

"I had an old friend at the station. He knows stuff. He thinks the only way we can get to the Ultracircus is to find a device that can locate it. Do you know what a texo compass is?"

"I know what a compass is."

"Ok. Well, same principle. A compass is 'attached' to North, right. A texo compass is attached to a thing. You could have a text compass for your house, say." Gef looks to the sky, "You could put a texo compass on that little pest."

"He was only protecting me. He does that."

"I know, I know. Really, it's your fault. You shouldn't have been playing with those kids. I told you to guard Arthra."

Able looked to the ground. "I could see her from where we were playing."

"That's not the point, kid. We need to stay low. We need to not draw attention to ourselves. *Especially* if we go where we might be going."

Able looked up again, "Where's that?"

Gef explained where the city was, what it was like, and the sort of riddle that Wacamolo had told him. "He said the door would be unlocked by mistake. I have to think he was talking about your... uh... your little guys."

Able looked at Po and smiled. "I guess we'll have to find out." Able stared into the middle distance for a while and then said, "What are tigers?"

Gef stroked his chin, "I have part of the cyclo compendium on animals. It says tigers were an ancient animal; organic, very dangerous. They have existed for thousands of years though, so I think we're fine. We'll find this hollow and this wind and voilá, I suppose."

"Gef, where do you keep the cyclopedia? Can I or Po read it?"

"I don't keep hard copies. I've committed it all to memory. One day, I'll write it all down again, but for now, it's safer in my head. There are people who would use it for bad things, Able."

"Can I try something?" Able asked.

"Sure."

"Here. You hold Po."

"Okay." Gef reached out and took the metallic purple ball in his hands.

"Find out what he know Po."

Suddenly, Gef sat up like a steel beam. The light in his eyes dimmed and Po began generating an electric field whose arcs danced around itself and Gef's hands. This went on for several minutes until Po slowly faded back to normal and the light came back into Gef's eyes. "What in Gaia's name just happened!?"

Able took Po from Gef and said, "Show me a tiger."

Po's lights sparkled and danced in the air and coalesced into a light model of a giant orange cat with black striped, menacingly prowling though the air.

"I'll be a clock." Gef stared in wonder at the image of the tiger. He knew all the information about them, but had never really seen one. "It copied my brain?"

Able held Po out. "He copies all kinds of stuff."

"How?"

Able shrugged.

Gef cocked his head and kept looking at the tiger. "Amazing."  Then after a quiet minute of contemplation, he said, "Show us the city of Horn."

Po obliged and a light model arose of a massive castle build around an enormous tusk of some kind. Windows and walkways had been carved into he horn and all around its base were the scree of buildings. The walls surrounding it looked high and massive.

Able said, "That's where we're going?"

Gef corrected him, "That's where we're *sneaking into*."

"Wow. It looks as big as a mesa."

"It's much bigger actually. And we need to try to get an audience with a man there. His name is Baron Rollo Leocadia and he's a mad scientist." Anticipating Able's next question, Gef said, "A scientist is a person who studies how the world works—like Ghendra. Unlike Ghendra, they're usually incredibly powerful and you don't mess with them. They're supposed to belong to this guild, a group that they have that has rules, but some of them don't and they're called mad."

"So they're not angry."

"I don't know. He's probably angry about something, but that's not why he's mad, yeah."

"He sounds important."

Gef pointed at the light model of the city. "He runs that whole place. He's real important."

"So why would he see us?"

"He wouldn't. He wouldn't see dust men and I bet he *really* wouldn't see a couple of clockworks."

"You said that name was bad."

"It is. But it's *our* word. We can say it. It's bad when other folks say it."

Able nodded.

"However, I do think the Baron would like to see your little creations. He might even know what they are."

"Really?" Able's eyes widened. He set Po on the ground, who shut off the light model and rolled over next to Ka, bumping it a couple of times. Ka made a cooing sound and the dustfish swam over to look at Po. Able thought about what Ghendra said about only showing his mistakes when the time was right. That had really not gone according to plan. But maybe this time it made sense. "So if we tell him about my mistakes, he might tell us about the text compass?"

"It's not that simple. We need leverage."

"What's—"

"It means we have something he really needs or needs to avoid—it just means we have better control of the situation than he does—which is a difficult proposition." Gef looked at the mistakes, especially Po—how much of him had that little thing copied? How did he get int he middle of this? Why had Ghendra sent Able to him? "But look. We have got to stay low. Horn has a lot of very interesting things in it and you're going to want to check it all out. You have to hold off on that, okay? There will be time for that later."

Able nodded. "I will not be curious!"

Gef laughed. "All right. Let's get some sleep. We'll come up with a plan sooner or later."

* * *

Hill behind hill of boulders and lichen reach up into the distance where the tip of the City of Horn can be seen. As the hills come down, there are here and there small indentions that grow in depth and width. These are hollows. Once in them, the light from the dim sun is even dimmer. There are scatterings and smatterings of sound. Sometimes a rock comes tumbling down the hollow walls. Having left Arthra and their supplies back at the butte, Able and Gef make there way down into one hollow and then back up out and then down again into another one. Able carries Po, while Nip and Ka'Rolly hover nearby.

Neither Gef nor Able has said much since entering the hollows. They are shadowy and quiet. There is no wind. After hours of climbing and descending, Gef says to Able, "There is something following us."

Able looks around. All is quiet. "Huh?"

Gef also looks around. "Yeah. I know what being followed feels like. Things should be quiet after we pass, but there are noises. I keep seeing a shadow back there." Gef points at the sky, "And that smoke. It's been moving."

"What do we do?"

"Hope it just follows us."

Down in one of the hollows, the bottom is muddy. "Water," says Gef.

"Is that good?"

"It's different. The other hollows have been bone dry."

Able looks around, "But there's no wind."

"Yup."

Just then, Gef has an idea. "Say, what if ol' Nip here were to carry Po up in the air and let Po have a look around." Gef bends down and looks at Po, "Could you make a map for us?"

Po shivers in Able's hand and looks to Able. Able says, "I think that means he's afraid of heights." He holds Po up to his face, "But that's okay; I'll go with you!" Po makes a sighing noise.

"You'll go with him?"

"Yeah. Watch this! Hey, Nip! Up, up and away!"

Nip floats over Able and grows ribbons that wrap around his waist like a seat. Able leans back and with a sound like gong, the three lift of the ground and fly a hundred meters in the air. Gef just looks up at them in wonder and amazement. He says to himself, "What the clock else can that bunch do?"

Able has come to love being in the sky. He can see so much. Troubles seem to stay behind on the ground. From his perch, he can see more of the City of Horn—it is magnificent. He can see the hollows spread out down from the hills around the city like great gaps between huge fingers of ridges. He holds Po out and says, "Make a map, please." Po sighs, unfolds two spindly legs and wraps them around Able's wrists, and then makes a sound of concentration, opening its many eyes very wide.

Able is patiently waiting when Po suddenly makes an alarming sound. With its left leg, he pulls on Able's arm and with its right leg points toward a patch of ground just beyond the last ridge they crossed over. Able can just barely see five slender dark silver bodies crawling slowly along, thin trails of black smoke rising from their backs. "Okay, Nip! Let' head back down."

Down on the ground, before Able can even get out of seat, he spits out in a loud whisper, "I saw them!"

"Saw who?"

"I don't know. Tigers."

"Tigers?"

"Not exactly. But they were crawling and like you said—"

Just then, atop a boulder in the wall of the hollow, one of the creatures appeared and screamed. It was on four legs and its mouth full of teeth. It's fur was soaked black with oil and in the center of its body, a brundlex churned out black smoke. It's tail was like a chain and it whipped about in the air.

Gef didn't hesitate and pushed Able into the hollow, "Run!"

As they scrambled into the hollow, Gef knew that they would get higher and reach a point where they could, if needed, if possible, defend themselves. He looked up long enough to see other creatures—fine, tigers—crawling along the ridge, trying to flank them. "Keep moving," he said to Able, who was running on pure fear.

But to Gef's surprise, the hollow and the muddy creek stayed level. The walls of the hollow were getting higher and they weren't traveling up. Instead, it seemed like they were trapping themselves. He thought hard about what to do. Nip! He looked around and the bold, little entity was red again and knocking himself into one of the tigers on the ridge. Just as he looked, the tiger lifted a front leg and brought it down hard on Nip, smashing it into the rocks. Gef shouted, "Nip!"

As soon as Able heard Gef, he stopped. He looked up the steep hill of rocks and saw Nip, dented and wobbling in his flight. The tiger took another swing at the little flying mistake and Nip went flying into the hollow, over the heads of Able and Gef, smashing into the rocks on the other side. The creature on the ridge screamed and black smoke billowed out of its back.

Able scrambled up the side of the hollow to Nip and knelt down. Nip was in tatters and wheezed when it saw Able. "Oh no! Nip!" Able picked it up.

From down the hill, Gef shouted, "Able! C'mon!"

Able made his way down and saw that one of the creatures was now in the hollow and behind them, crouching low to the ground. As Able and Gef kept running into the deepening hollow, Able shouted, "What do they want?"

"What do you think? Us!"

The hollow came to a stop at a large boulder. Gef muttered, "No, no, no." The five companions came to stand (and float) with their backs to the boulder. The smoking, mechanical tigers crept closer to the group, each in turn screaming and howling at the sky.

Then the whole hollow began to dance with lights. Small spots of color appeared, dancing across the walls of the hollow, the rocks, even the tigers. Able looked down and saw that Po was shaking and emitting all of the light. He held him aloft and Po exploded with light! The dancing dots began to collect together and form the shape of a massive, long, scaly dragon, with billowing hair and a giant maw. It curled up over Able and Po and then Po emitted a deafening roar. It shook Able and shut his hearing down it was do loud.

The tigers all hunched down and slowly backed off their rocks, then turned and ran.

There was a long moment of silence among the crew, and then the dragon slowly faded away and Po shrank in size, turned ashen and fizzled, smoke coming out of cracks in his shell.

Gef took a few steps forward, then said, "What was that!?" He was shocked and laughing at the same time.

Able didn't notice. He knelt down in the muddy pools in front of the boulder and set both Po and Nip down in it. He pushed his hands through the mud, looking for the glint of electrol. As he did, Gef watched as a kind of whispy blue field surrounded Able. The energy moved around him and down his arms to where he caressed the two little mistakes. The field seeped into Po and Nip and tendrils of new material began to form around them like a cocoon. It seeped into them and they began to form perfect spheres again, Nip losing all his edges, but Po just growing back to his normal size.

Po rolled away and then lifted itself on its three legs. It again shown a light, this time at the boulder and there appeared a light model of Able, digging in the mud. Able looked  and walked over to the light model of himself and began digging. He quickly hit stone and began pushing the mud away from it. Seeing what was happened, Gef got down on his hands and knees and started digging at the mud as well. Slowly they revealed what appeared to be a platform of some kind with a hole in it. Once it appeared, Po retracted his legs and rolled over to the hole and fit neatly in it.

The ground of the pool at the end of the hollow shook, the water drained away, and then a gap appeared in the ground, and before they could stand or float, Able, Po, Nip, and Gef disappeared down into the mud.

Ka'Rolly floated in the air watching. Rolly swam around in a circle and then put his face to the bottom of Ka. Ka made a sound like a question.

electrol