---
title: The Zen Master Does Not Command
created: 2025-01-10
categories: listen, obedience, arrogance 
---

## The Zen Master Does Not Command

### Sit Down & Listen

The Zen master Banker’s talk were attended not only by students of Zen but by persons of interest of many persuasions, social ranks and sects. He never quoted sutras, nor indulged in scholastic dissertations. Instead, his words were spoken from the heart to the hearts of his listeners.

One of Bankei’s talks angered a local priest because his congregation had left him to hear the Zen master speak. The strong-headed priest also went to the talk determined to debate the master. While Bankei was speaking, the priest stood up from the crowd of listeners and shouted, “Zen teacher! Whoever respects you will listen and obey you, but I do not respect you. Can you make me obey you?”

“I am not sure but if you come up beside me, I may try.”

Proudly, the priest pushed his way through the crowd to the teacher.

Baker smiled. “I think you will be able to make your argument better on my right side. Come hover here.”

The priest strode to Banker’s right side and stood arms akimbo.

“No,” said Bankei. “I was mistaken. My hearing on my right side is not as good. Come back to my left side so that I might hear you better.”

The priest moved again.

“You see?” said Bankei. “You have obeyed me three times now. And I think you are a gentle person. Now sit down and listen.”

* * *

Recovery can offer us wisdom that we are not prepared to hear because of our pride, inflated, at times, by our addiction. When we have a brain disorder that tells us we do not have a disorder, our addictions can move us without our understanding of how. It is easier to deny the wisdom available from recovery and tell ourselves we do not need it. Perhaps we have successfully abstained in the past, but if we are rigorously honest with ourselves, we know that when we broke from abstinence, things went quickly out of control again because the addiction again began moving us.

It is not that we are transferring control from the addiction to recovery. We are opening our minds (which addiction has secretly been piloting) to the wisdom of those who have walked before us. We can only learn to change if we listen.