# Chapter 1

## In which we meet Able and learn of his simple existence in the Shattered Land.

Able stood in the starless, crimson night, beneath the great, glowing Skybow of the Goliaths, holding a small squirming, copper rodent. It fizzled and smoked and threw out sparks in his hands. Able presses his metallic thumb to the top of the creature’s head. The lights in its eyes go out. His own eyes, circles of cyan light, scan the creature’s wound. He lay the little desert rodent on its back and removes a bag of electrol from his backpack. He poured it liberally on the little creature's back legs and moving his hands as if he were engaged in the delicate choreography of thread and needle, worked the electrol into the legs where the shiny substance formed new pistons and shiny ligaments on the animal. After ten minutes of this, the rodent’s four back legs look solid to Able, so he holds the creature in front of him, presses his thumb to the critter’s head, and the gold lights in its eyes return.

"There. All fixed!"

The creature, detecting its newfound mobility, squirms in Able's grasp and tries to get free. Able lets it go where it scurries off into a crack between some piles of cartridges and other metallic refuse. Able stares after it. "You're welcome."

Able turned his attention past the piles of junk to where the Skybow touched the horizon. To where he knew Delphine’s scar lay, where surely the monstrous meteor Delphine rolled across the land even now, like a titan’s marble fired across the game of the landscape. His imagination carried him past the scar to the Silt Sea, and its massive of undulations of dust. Having never seen either of those vast beacons of a world beyond his, he knew they were there. His mother had told him so. She had told him of other wonders beyond the scar and the sea. He sighed into the night, dreaming of towers of technology and the scientists of legend.

He looked down at his small feet and wondered. He was created here, in the rocky, metallic Desert of Idex Mortez, the desert of dead ideas. It was a barren gray vista made up of ancient wreckage—piled precariously—as high as buildings in places, interrupted by mesas that lorded over the vast wasteland and that got up and lumbered about at night, static lightning tracing the silent steps of their many spindly legs. 

The bodies of giant, fossilized trilobites and silt centipedes, with transparent exoskeletons were draped all across the landscape, forever frozen in death, for nothing really rotted in the Idex Mortez. And over all the carcasses and refuse, smaller creatures—silverfish and scurrying six-legged cybernetic rodents—made their homes, feeding off the forgotten circuitry and launching themselves into the air with rockets fueled by electrol.

The piles of broken technology leaned as they eroded and slowly turned to dust. Upon those trillions of artifacts were, in a sense, chiseled stories both true and false. There were philosophies and theories, both true and false. There were secrets and myths. There were discarded writings from a more stable age, long forgotten. The Archelux, the world, had long ago come undone and become the Shattered Land.

At night, while Able poked about for injured or friendly animals, he would occasionally look up. Most of the sky was covered by the Skybow of the Goliaths—a massive bright white and blue rainbow that stretched from one horizon to the other. There were only ever just a few dim stars, red smudges, in the night sky. The world was never dark in the Desert of Idex Mortez, lit by the Skybow. Twilight blue on nice nights, crimson when the storms were throwing up dust from the sea.

The mesas only moved at night. Occasionally some errant trader might ride a centipede through the area, looking for schwag or treasure. It is said there are still *books* in the desert, but Able’s father always dismissed this as myth. He had scoured the land for ages. Those travelers often make the mistake of making camp near a mesa. When a mesa stands, ripping its long-settled bulk from its crater, stretching out its crustacean legs, its sudden locution can be heard for miles around like thunder. It is a mystery why the mesas of the Desert of Idex Mortez move at all, but they do, walking for a few hours in the dark of night, lit up by their halos of lightning, only to crash down their entire bulk on a new spot for reasons known only to them, often crushing what life is unfortunate enough to be where they land.

While it is difficult to tell a dead mesa from a living one, it is not impossible. A dead mesa's legs will close up around itself in a tight, spiny fist; like a dried-out spider. Another sign of life is the ultrasonic noise that living mesas put out. You cannot hear it, but you can feel it in the ground. There are other ways, other signs, but the first sign is the best guarantee of some safety.

Nestled beneath one such dead mesa, there is a rusty shack where a man named Jedediah and his family live. He has a wife, Evo and two sons: Able and Kane. Evo is sick and bedridden in the shack, her body covered in rough blankets and surrounded by pumps and machines that are keeping her alive. The older brother is a nasty brute; one who decided to turn his discomfort and pain on animals and his brother.

Every day, Jedediah and his two sons travel out into the desert where they gathered the ancient detritus, stacking it on carts and hauling the remnants of a lost civilization back to a clearing between the great dead mesa and their homestead. There, they load the stuff on to a brundlex, which scans the junk and then pushes it along a conveyor belt where they are crushed. Out of the back of the brundlex comes blackrock—a fuel that can be sold to the trader caravans and others. With the right technology, blackrock can be used to create small amounts of energy, enough to run other brundlexes. The junk rodents, with their built-in brundlexes thrive on blackrock.

A second substance comes from the process. To nearly anyone, it simply looks like dust. But Able can tell the difference between mere dust and electrol. Jedediah keeps the electrol for his younger son. The boy has a strange knack for making things with it. It is, without question, a heretical behavior to make the things that Able does. The things... the things-that-move-of-their-own—even the things keeping his wife Evo alive—they are of a spontaneous nature, not of Enubys. Jedidiah thinks, one does not make Enubys in the face of Enubys. Movement without soul is to spit in the face of Enubys, but Jedediah is old and tired and loves his wife, so he looks past Able's abilities and strange creations. Still, Jedediah is suspicious of his adopted son and believes him to be cursed.

* * *

Evo, buried among the hissing pumps and ventilators that her son Able made for her, breathes heavily in a tattered and gray linen nightgown. In a fever she has pushed all the blankets aside. A mask on her face covers her nose and mouth and even that only lets her breathe with difficulty. Able, on returning from his nightly sojourn stands in the doorway, listening to the hum of his machines that are keeping her alive. The tall accordion towers surround her, moving asynchronously up and down with tiny huffs and sucking sounds; liquids gush and rush from one tower to another, the paltry air squeezed in to a sphere that spins a liquid and dispenses it over and over again.

Although Able brought the machines into existence, he does not know how they function. It is the way of the electrol that he gives his creations a will and a purpose—though he knows the purpose is unnecessary. As bad as he feels for his mother, he feels bad for the machines as well. They will never know more than to do one thing over and over and over. This is not what she taught him to do with his talent.

The small back room where his mother lay is a miniature city skyline, filled with tubes and pipes and dirty glass huddled in around the valley of where her body lay on a small, rotting mattress. A single window, high up on the rickety bedroom wall allows in a tea-colored light pushed through a filter of dirt.

Able holds his hands uselessly at his side, then clasps them behind his back, watching as the machines make their symphony. The tired light in the room captures and frames a thousand motes of dust, each in a Brownian dance. He closes his eyes and takes a moment to miss her. He travels backwards in time.

Lost in memories behind closed eyes now, he turns his head up from the floor, playing with bits of rock, to see his mother looking at him with that familiar and perplexed look on her face, wondering at the measure of oddity in him. He sits and plays with electrol creations that roll about on the floor, aimless but excited. Then, as always she smiles and pets his  head, light from nowhere silhouetting her head. "You are so special Able. You are one of a kind. I love you."

Able opens his eyes to the reality of the room, filled with colors like mold, mildew, rot, and he is not sure why he remembers the sunlight ever being golden. Outside dust devils come to rattle the windows and pay their respects with obsidian-eyed sorrow. East, further off from Jedidiah's little valley, running against the dun-colored sunrises, marred by wavy lines of heat, run the shadows of the traders’ centipede caravans; slow, rumbling, multi-legged.

* * *

Able slips quiet into his room after foraging with his father for the morning. He slides a loop of twine around the door knob and a rusty nail in the wall—a privacy of sorts. Able smiles to himself as he reaches underneath his cot for secret treasure. He smiles because he knows that not all the ideas in the desert are dead, that not all machines have purpose. He has three that he calls his *mistakes*. They are, all three, small orbs of shifting parts and twinkling lights. They are more to him than the machines he’s created to assist his mother at his father’s command. He has given these "mistakes" only their own purpose.

When Able has spoken to his Father of machines he has made, his Father’s answer is always the same: “This is a valley of men and women who have been outspoken against the True nature of things; who have thought their words history! They ignore the shadow of the Skybow and how it blots out the home of the Gods. They have all been wrong! Their petty and unnatural thoughts have come to rest here because ideas cannot outlast, Enubys, the Ungod of Time. All those outspoken against the True Nature of the universe are dead and wrong. They die with their mistakes. And there is no idea ever conceived that does not rest here; in this desert at the end. Enubys is entropy, boy. Entropy is all.”

Able's mistakes roll about the floor, lit up, whirring and blinking as they bump into the cot and Able and each other. He can hear the sound of his mother’s kind voice, asking him, *What are you dreaming, Able?* Unlike his other creations, when he made these three, he only tried to imagine what purpose they might want for themselves. 

Po, the littlest of the three wants very little. Able amuses himself by walking around the room in a circle and watches as Po follows him everywhere, dodging the other two more rambunctious mistakes, singing a short sweet song of relief when Able sits down and Po can roll up against him and also sit in quiet.

Ka and Nip were much more content to explore the room to its edges, sometimes getting into pushing matches with each other when their paths crossed. In large part they ignored Able and Po except when Able has gathered electrol to feed them. When Able placed his hand down with a small pile of shiny dust, they rolled to him in a hurry and sucked it up with tinks and blips of satisfaction. Able fed Po separately for this reason; the littlest of the three could not compete with its siblings when a feeding happened.

After a feeding, all three of his mistakes would light up, burning with orange and violet and green and pink light that seeped out from between their clockworks and panels. Ka would just grow larger, heavier. Nip sometimes would throw out a new appendage of a disc around itself. Po, though, never changed much, except that his insides, between the cracks in his shell, were more dense than the other two.

Able sat with his arms around his knees, Po by his side, cooing, while Ka and Nip duked it out hyperactively, until the afternoon respite was over. Able’s father would call out from the other room, “Boys!” and Able would herd his mistakes into a small burlap sack where they would fuss at first and then calm down, turn their lights down and “sleep” until later in the day when Able would check on them again.

After today’s feeding Able is delighted and takes in a sharp breath when Nip does something new and extraordinary. After having bumped up against Ka several times, Nip sits still and quivers. Its light fades, and then with a burst of renewed energy, Nip is surrounded by twin halos and lifts itself off the ground! Able’s eyes stretched wide open as Nip hovered over its sibling Ka, circled around it once or twice teasing, and then fluttered back into Able’s hands, as if looking for approval.

Curious, Able held Nip aloft, not touching it. There was a force field between Able’s hands and Nip’s new rings. The rings around Nip glowed and rotated. Able almost shouted out with glee, before a furtive look around in the quiet. He can’t call attention to his creations. Instead, he held Nip close, a neon green light reflecting on his face, and said, “Nice trick, Nip!”