# Chapter 3

## In which Able wanders the Desert Idex Mortez with Po, Ka and Nip

With no direction to follow other than his father’s bony index finger pointing to the valley, Able headed toward the upside-down beetle. With its mysterious half-buried hives, there might be something for him to—he didn't know what. Like his mistakes, he had no purpose. At the bottom of the hill between his Father's cabin and the tablet-crushing brundlex, he quickly grabbed a sack and filled it with as much electrol as he could find.

Able scrambled over piles of cartridges with the sack of electrol and Po and Ka stowed in their bag, and Nip flitting about his head, just ahead of him. He inched his way through small paths that had been cleared over many years by his family and others who mined the scrap. After several hours of this, and as it was growing dark, he came to a depression, a crater in the detritus. He guessed it was the former resting place of one of the mesas.

It was then that Able realized the full scope of his problems. He was alone, at night, when the mesas traveled (crushing other animals underfoot). He did not know where he was going. He had no reason to go anywhere. He turned to the only thing he had: the sack of electrol. He might as well feed his mistakes. He scrabbled to the bottom of the crater. He sat on the ground with his back resting against the wall. As he sat and fed Po, Ka and Nip, more problems surfaced. And of all of them, the worst was that he was not sure if he would ever see his mother again.

As usual, Po quickly re-electroled and then rolled to Able's backside and hid behind him. Poor Ka, though, was in bad shape. It had gashes in its side that were leaking a vermillion dust. Nip was high above the crater, about in its center, hovering. When Able looked up, Nip was the brightest thing in the night sky. There were few stars to be seen, not that Able knew what stars were. He thought, maybe they were siblings of Nip?

He attended to Ka, taking a handful of electrol from his sack and pouring it on and around Ka, who seemed to swell up a tad and then sigh, and then shudder. As it did so, Ka retracted in size a smidge and then the gashes disappeared from its surface. Ka brightened in color.

"Feeling better, then?" Able asked, and Ka spun in a circle and chirped.

"At least one of us is doing all right." He reached out and pet Ka, who reacted in no particular way, just rolling in angled circles, appearing to enjoy his renewed smooth surface.

Able peered under his arm at Po. Po never grew in size or transformed like Nip. "My father said I was a runt. Are you a runt?"

Po growled.

Finally Able turned a handful of electrol to the sky, looking up at Nip, shining in a green-to-yellow and back again pattern. Nip made no noise, no move closer. Ka was bright enough that it never really got dark at the bottom of the crater, and Able curled up at the bottom of the ridge and slept, hoping that mesas would not come to rest at the same place twice.

* * *

Able was rapidly approaching the upside-down beetle. The wind rushed by him. The world moved by at such a fast pace he couldn't see every detail he wanted to. The world was very big.

That morning Able awoke with Po and Ka close by his side, but Nip, back down from his vigil, was scrounging around in the bag of electrol. Able tried to drag him out of the bag to make sure that he would not eat all of it, but Nip was too heavy. Instead, Able had to pull the bag off Nip, revealing a very swollen mistake. Where the center of Nip had been a sphere, it now pulsed with, flat hexagonal surfaces shifting into points and then back flat again.

Able shooed Po and Ka (who were rolling in a perimeter around Nip) back into their bag. He picked up what was left of the electrol, and then began to make his way to the opposite side of the crater. But when it became obvious that Nip was not following, Able turned and walked back to him. "Are you sick? Did you eat too much?"

"I'm not leaving without you. You need to come along." Able tried to push Nip with his shoe, but the mistake wouldn't move. Able squatted down to Nip's level. "You don't *look* sick." He reached out to grab Nip's outer ring, hoping to be able to drag the little mistake, and much to his surprise, the ring was warm and removable. Able lifted the outer ring up and with a loud *brrraaaat* Nip's center ring and then the core of the mistake rose up from the ground as if pulled by puppet strings. All of Nip's parts were in line with the outer ring raised over Able's head. Nip's core spun wildly in midair, vacillating from a smooth sphere to a pointed dodecahedron while the spinning center ring made a whumping sound. Nip's center shimmered like a rainbow, one color chasing another all across the center. The ring begin to pull up on Able's hand and lifted his arm up over his shoulder. Able hung on, but wasn't sure he should. "We tried this before, Nip! I don't think it's a good idea."

The core spun until it was bright white, the humming turning into a melodic chord, then a flash, and then two metallic ribbons burst out from the core and dropped down to wrap around Able's waist and behind his legs. The tones that Nip was emitting grew louder and higher, as Nip began to lift Able off the ground. As Nip beamed and sounded out, Able found himself sitting comfortably in a swing seat made of the metallic ribbons. Then, Nip's music ceased, and light burst out of it, returning it to a bright green shimmering. Its core took the form of a flattened dodecahedron, and the sound returned to a low hum. Before Able knew it, they were above the crater and racing off toward the upside-down beetle.

* * *

As opposed to when they practically fell off the dead mesa the night before, this landing was quite nice. Nip brought Able gently to the ground about ten feet away from the beetle with its head stuck in the ground. Only now, it didn't look so much like a beetle. For one, it was very tall. Its legs looked more like thumbs, and they didn't squirm about the way a desperate beetle's legs might. They swung gently through the air, alternating back and forth,  each one with a fan embedded in the end. Nip retracted its ribbons and hovered in place. Able reached up and patted him, "Thanks, Nip. That might've taken us days to walk."

They had landed on top of a hill, and from where they were, Able could see new things. For one, he could see the dead mesa near his father's house, smaller now than he had ever seen it. Knowing he could travel faster with the help of Nip, he felt less upset about being away from home and his mother. Maybe his father would calm down. He could go back later.

Looking, down the hill, away from his home, he saw the structures that looked like hives buried in the ground. They were covered in hexagonal windows, almost the whole of them being dark glass. And then, not too far from those, he could see a figure digging in the ground. *Well*, Able thought, *I guess I could ask where I am*.