# General Notes

## Ideas for Later:

+ Cal and Gef used to work for Set, a member of the council. Set had the audacious idea to create an energy source for the world that would tap into the Obtala itself (the fabric of reality) and so provide limitless energy forever. Something went wrong and the device that Set built, the Ultimate Fabricator, reversed and began sucking energy and organization out of the world. Gef was so torn up by what they had done that he abandoned the project and had his memory erased by one of the council members. Cal stayed on and tried to fix the project but found it impossible with the knowledge of Set. There were rumors that Set had backed himself up somewhere but no one knew where that was.

+ The signal from the Texo Compass is intercepted and pulls the crew to Sultana Nur Waya. The city has been overtaken by Cal, Gef's "brother" a synthezoid who worked for Enki and is attempted to build an escape from the world and the Shattering. He thinks Enki was right that eternal growth over sustainability is paramount. He also believe that Enki didn't go far enough. He plans to completely destroy the Obtala and use the Ultracircus as a raft to get to the next realm. He's not evil, but like Thanos, his plan is misguided. He has Horr'off locked up.

+ What is Gef's story? Who was Gef working for? Is Wacamolo more than he lets on—like Fizban?

+ The villain of this story did what he did out of love; he didn't mean for the destruction to happen. But so long as its happened, he sees it as progress. We now know that he did it to find some infinite energy source.

+ ~~Po eats the Texo Compass~~

+ Evo was a member of the council. She alone among scientists of the council re-discovered the ability to create synthoids. She created a child synthoid in the hopes of creating a true form of optimism and balance and sustainability in opposition to Enki’s ideas of constant growth.

+ I actually like Set as a name for this character. It shares the same number of letters as Evo and they are opposing forces. It’s the Egyptian god of destruction. It’s a mathematical construct.

+ Does the council have access to “the Gods”—did they ever?

+ Ghendra was Evo's student.

+ ~~The crew meets a thing like Nip but massive and dangerous.~~ The crew meets something like the mistakes in the Automatic Jungle.

+ ~~The crew has to make their way through a jungle of nanotechnology that tries to transform them.~~

+ ~~Rilla and Wacamolo show up with Arthra and stuff at the entrance to the city of Horn.~~

+ Nip becomes a swarm. Arthra learns to fly (by walking on copies of Nip).

+ Baron Leocadia sends bounty hunters after the crew.

+ The crew acquires a fighter of some kind. Do they free a mechanoman?


## Character Arcs

The story circle (see below) is pretty spelled out for Able, but I need to think harder and insert the same for the other characters. Right now, Wacamolo is there to support the others and sort of be a father figure to Rilla, but what really is his own story? He's a mystic as opposed to a scientist and that should play a greater role in the story.

### Able
1. Able lives in the desert, content to do as his father wishes and look after his sick mother.
2. He loves, what he calls his mistakes, autonomous programs that he created with the help of his mother.
3. He is discovered by his father and banished from the only home he knows.
4. He is told by Ghendra that he must find the Ultracircus. He tries to deny this only to discover that his mother has died.
5. He meets people along the way and inspires them. His deontological stance sways people and even inspires those who might be considered "evil".
6. He pays a price for this several times. Cal puts him in a new body that he hates. He may also seem to die during the repair or reboot.
7. He goes back to the Idex Mortez? He could return in a symbolic sense.
8. Now he is a programmer of the world?

### Gef
1. Gef is a trader in the badlands. He is disguised and safe so long as he keeps moving.
2. He knows he has forgotten a lot. He may be thousands of years old. He is looking for the Cyclo(pedia) to perhaps give him his memory back.
3. He runs into Able, a synthezoid child. And Able can program. This, he knows, is really strange and he decides to try to protect Able and his automata.
4. He has to protect Able in lots of clever ways because he does not believe in using violence. He would rather run than fight.
5. He gets ahold of the Cyclo at the Ultracircus and uses it and Po to have his memory returned, but it is devastating because he discovers he played a significant role in the Shattering.
6. This causes him to want to destroy himself.
7. With Able's help, he is able to see that they can build the world anew. But the reboot costs him his life, which is thinks is just.
8. There is no 8. for Gef.

### Wacamolo
1. An old man of Kinton Station; he is considered the wisest and most knowledgable in the area.
2. He is old and doesn't feel that he has seen enough of the world. The only way to truly learn more is go out into the world with Able and Gef.
3. Traveling with Able and Gef puts Wacamolo in danger. Because he is old and frail, he cannot fight, but he can use his knowledge from time to time to give the group an advantage.
4. His mysticism must be challenged.
5. His search is to create a tome similar to that of Remory's pre-shattering work.
6. Cal intends to ramp up the Shattering and destroy the world.
7. When the council is reformed, he is asked to be the sage and historian of a brand new world.
8. Wacamolo has changed in that he understands that since mysticism lacks the rigor of science, it can lead down a dark path.

## Time

Ern - Dustmyn notions for hours.

## Ideas for Later:

+ Wacamolo tells a story about bees and one bee who thought he had free will.

+ The signal from the Texo Compass is intercepted and pulls the crew to Sultana Nur Waya. The city has been overtaken by Cal, Gef's "brother" a synthezoid who worked for Enki and is attempted to build an escape from the world and the Shattering. He thinks Enki was right that eternal growth over sustainability is paramount. He also believe that Enki didn't go far enough. He plans to completely destroy the Obtala and use the Ultracircus as a raft to get to the next realm. He's not evil, but like Thanos, his plan is misguided. He has Horr'off locked up.

+ What is Gef's story? Who was Gef working for? Is Wacamolo more than he lets on—like Fizban?

+ The villain of this story did what he did out of love; he didn't mean for the destruction to happen. But so long as its happened, he sees it as progress. We now know that he did it to find some infinite energy source.

+ ~~Po eats the Texo Compass~~

+ Evo was a member of the council. She alone among scientists of the council re-discovered the ability to create synthoids. She created a child synthoid in the hopes of creating a true form of optimism and balance and sustainability in opposition to Gabriel's ideas of constant growth.

+ Ghendra was Evo's student.

+ ~~The crew meets a thing like Nip but massive and dangerous.~~ The crew meets something like the mistakes in the Automatic Jungle.

+ ~~The crew has to make their way through a jungle of nanotechnology that tries to transform them.~~

+ ~~Rilla and Wacamolo show up with Arthra and stuff at the entrance to the city of Horn.~~

+ Nip becomes a swarm. Arthra learns to fly (by walking on copies of Nip).

+ Baron Leocadia sends bounty hunters after the crew.

+ The crew acquires a fighter of some kind. Do they free a mechanoman?

## The Story Circle

1. A character you can identify with
2. The character has a wish or need that is unfulfilled
3. The need or wish causes them to cross a threshold
4. They go down a road of trials
5. They are searching for something and find it (like it or not)
6. That discovery kicks their ass
7. They come back to the world they started in having gone through trials
8. Having changed


Understanding, or at least manipulating the CODE is the unrealized boon!

## Publishing

Bitly for drafts
https://bit.ly/3oswCW5