# Cast and Characters

## Main Cast

Able  
Po, Ka, and Nip
Ka'Rolly (Ka but later)
Gef
Wacamolo  
Rilla  
Nicolle  
Xistra  


KlckClck  
Horr'off  

## Supporting Players
Jedidiah
Evo
Kane  
Ghendra
Alharih - Leader of the Free People's of the Steppes of 



## Villians
The Baron Leocadia  
Vivian the Terror  

## The Council
### 1. Enki
The scientist responsible for the Shattering. He believed that there was a way to extract energy from the higher dimension (Warnel) that would allow Obtala (the lower dimension) to exist forever. The Gods of old, who had said not to test the code, were wrong in the eyes of Enki. Instead, his experiment backfired and the world of Obtala began to be sucked into the void at the center of the Inverted Mountain—the home base and laboratory of Enki.

### 2. Vivian
The wife of Enki and scientist in her own right. She did not entirely believe in Enki's ideas, but then there was an obvious need to create a power for the world to keep it at its status quo with its growing population. Vivian supported Enki's experiments but at times was terrified by the lengths he would go to channel into the next world; a place she knew was forbidden because of the programming in the nanosphere she had read.

### 3. Evo
Evo did not believe in maintaining the status quo. Evo felt that the world was already unbalanced and the only balance to be found would be in the mysteries of what the world made of itself.

She felt that a return to the natural state of things was what must be done; though she understood that much had changed since the beginning of it. Civilizations should turn to reducing their need for power and instead compact it in the simple nature of the face that the Gods were not Gods; rather architects of rules—unapologetic artists. The Gods clearly left their artifacts behind. She engineered much of the Gods technology in order to create the Idex Automata.

### 4. Nyn
On the side of Evo, Nyn also felt that the world would not survive the unbalancing required to create more and more new technologies with the nanosphere. Cultures around the world needed to be urged to reduce and live with less. Nyn was a F'myn woman and would lead here people to create their massive greenhouse cities in the Yeutta region in the North where the Ultracircus ultimately stalled.

### 5. Kiokesuimas
A myconoid. He disappeared not long after the Shattering. No one knows where he is or if he is still alive.

### 6. Horr'off
A Krunmynkind. Very good at Quodecraft and created the three Quibits that Evo gave to Able. Horr'off is still overseeing the living city of Berf on the back of the giant Silt tortoise Harko.

### 7. Tallqvist
A Dustmyn council member and scientist. He was the discoverer of the Qubit design. He has a laboratory east of the Automatic jungle and is responsible for the mess there.

### 8. Erra
A great Logicanth Scientist, Erra was a woman of the Aaraamyn peoples. She is at the city of Uchava.

### 9. Remory
The first synthoid (though legend has made him out to be a Nomex scientist). He was in large part the librarian for the council and created numerous tomes and Qubit devices that recorded the Archelux.

### 10. Fuurhif
A representative of the The F'myn people. Whereabouts unknown.

### 11. Nunin
A nomex scientist who specialized in the study of Sul and the effects of Nil. Currently at the Inverted Mountain studying the effects of the wormhole.

### 12. KlckClck
A Chimexipodian Scientist. It currently resides at the great hive East of the Inverted Mountain and is in the process of organizing a takeover of the entirety of Ur.


## Character Arcs

The story circle (see below) is pretty spelled out for Able, but I need to think harder and insert the same for the other characters. Right now, Wacamolo is there to support the others and sort of be a father figure to Rilla, but what really is his own story? He's a mystic as opposed to a scientist and that should play a greater role in the story.

### Able
1. Able lives in the desert, content to do as his father wishes and look after his sick mother.
2. He loves, what he calls his mistakes, autonomous programs that he created with the help of his mother.
3. He is discovered by his father and banished from the only home he knows.
4. He is told by Ghendra that he must find the Ultracircus. He tries to deny this only to discover that his mother has died.
5. He meets people along the way and inspires them. His deontological stance sways people and even inspires those who might be considered "evil".
6. He pays a price for this several times. Cal puts him in a new body that he hates. He may also seem to die during the repair or reboot.
7. He goes back to the Idex Mortez? He could return in a symbolic sense.
8. Now he is a programmer of the world?

### Gef
1. Gef is a trader in the badlands. He is disguised and safe so long as he keeps moving.
2. He knows he has forgotten a lot. He may be thousands of years old. He is looking for the Cyclo(pedia) to perhaps give him his memory back.
3. He runs into Able, a synthezoid child. And Able can program. This, he knows, is really strange and he decides to try to protect Able and his automata.
4. He has to protect Able in lots of clever ways because he does not believe in using violence. He would rather run than fight.
5. He gets ahold of the Cyclo at the Ultracircus and uses it and Po to have his memory returned, but it is devastating because he discovers he played a significant role in the Shattering.
6. This causes him to want to destroy himself.
7. With Able's help, he is able to see that they can build the world anew. But the reboot costs him his life, which is thinks is just.
8. There is no 8. for Gef.

### Wacamolo
1. An old man of Kinton Station; he is considered the wisest and most knowledgable in the area.
2. He is old and doesn't feel that he has seen enough of the world. The only way to truly learn more is go out into the world with Able and Gef.
3. Traveling with Able and Gef puts Wacamolo in danger. Because he is old and frail, he cannot fight, but he can use his knowledge from time to time to give the group an advantage.
4. His mysticism must be challenged.
5. His search is to create a tome similar to that of Remory's pre-shattering work.
6. Cal intends to ramp up the Shattering and destroy the world.
7. When the council is reformed, he is asked to be the sage and historian of a brand new world.
8. Wacamolo has changed in that he understands that since mysticism lacks the rigor of science, it can lead down a dark path. 