# Glossary

Cyclopedia, The
: A large device (of unknown type) that can tell you most things about the Archelux. It is essentially considered a user manual for the world.

Extravision
: Some beings ability to see into more of the electromagnetic spectrum than normal light, or the ability to see heat, or the ability to see into the Quode dimension.

Idex Automata
: Evo's creation. Unlike Enki's design, the Idex Automata can use energy from the high plane, but it does do by tunneling into the lower plane and adjusting quode at a microscopic level. Able is built around an Idex Automata which gives him the ability to manipulate Obtala in any way he sees fit.

Logicanth
: A manipulation of the nanosphere that results in a change in the world.

Qubit
: A device made up of crystallized nanosphere. Very hard to construct, but can be found at the center of most quodecraft-based lifeforms. For some reason, not Able.

Quode
: A force in the universe that can imbibe an inorganic thing with will.

Quodecraft
: The art of constructing things out of the nanosphere. For something to do more than be a repetitive machine, it requires a Qubit.

Macrobots
: Namely, Nip, Po and Ka.

Nanosphere
: The tiny machines that exist everywhere in the world, in the air that can be used to manipulate the physical nature of the world as well as construct macrobots.

"Remory’s Guide to the Archelux"
: A book by one of the original council members that describes the Western Hemisphere of Ur.

Sul
: A force separate from Quode that generates time and replication with mutation. One could consider Sul similar to entropy and without it, things would simply repeat forever.

Texo compass
: A device that can hone in on a target from anywhere in the world by firing a laser toward it.

## The Species of the Archelux

### Synthezoids
An ancient race of machine people, synthezoid beings were constructed tens of thousands of years ago. Although they were manufactured and not intended to procreate, they are actually the first children of the Shattered Land. Though synthezoids possess the ability to construct others of their own kind, how synthezoids function is lost to time. In fact, they are daemons of the world, but because the original Koders of Warnel abandoned it, the daemons had little left to do but maintain the world and when the First Council formed, there was only left for them to obey the council. So they did. And when the council failed, they wandered and most disappeared.

### Nomex
The nomex are the most common sentient creatures in the world. However, they range in color and appearance. The nomex of the Idex Mortez tend to be dark skinned with dark hair, while the nomex of Boisneval, for instance, are tall and very thin and have very light-colored skin, pinkish to blonde to gray hair and bright blue, green or purple eyes.

### Myconoids
Underground dwellers, the Myconoids, without their biome, are very tall (2 meters) and very thin and haveno eyes. They grow lichen and mushrooms on themselves (referred to as their biome) for sustenance and protection.

### Dustmyn
Similar in size and shape to nomex, the dustmyn live on and around the Silt Sea, their capital city being Hasnasfresis, a city built on the back of a giant, ancient (long dead) silt tortoise. They are small in stature (~1 meter) and grow their hair in long, thick bushels that collect silt, protecting them both from the sun and wind on the Silt Sea. Their hair is generally brown or blonde and their eyes usually gold, but they are rarely seen without significant amounts of obscuring clothing such as goggles. They are quiet and fierce.

### Chimexapods
Large mantis-like insect people who live East of the Inverted Mountain. They generally stay in their territory, but in recent times, for some reason, they have been encroaching on other lands.

### The F'myn
_(F'myn is really pronounced like wind in the trees, but not really possible for other races to speak)_ There should be a people like the Fynn, a tree people, but I'm not sure how to get them into the world since there aren't really forests anymore. Maybe they're extinct and the crew only finds out about them through some holodeck-style interaction. Or maybe, they've developed incredibly intricate green houses, much like Ghendra's and water to them is more precious than gold. They have programmers that can make it for them at great cost.

### Aaraamyn
A vulture-like bird people. Their capital city is the floating city of Uchava. Their culture is very Japanese-like with a great appreciation for design and for things to have longevity. They are largely content to live in their floating houses and cities and ignore the lower world. They have maintained lots of greenery and agriculture by being higher in the atmosphere where there is more light and more oxygen.

### Krunmyn
A large people (4 meters tall on average) with very rocky skin and large mouths. They live on the silt sea opposite the Dustmyn and are on generally friendly terms with them.

## The Council
### 1. Enki
The scientist responsible for the Shattering. He believed that there was a way to extract energy from the higher dimension (Warnel) that would allow Obtala (the lower dimension) to exist forever. The Gods of old, who had said not to test the code, were wrong in the eyes of Enki. Instead, his experiment backfired and the world of Obtala began to be sucked into the void at the center of the Inverted Mountain—the home base and laboratory of Enki.

### 2. Vivian
The wife of Enki and scientist in her own right. She did not entirely believe in Enki's ideas, but then there was an obvious need to create a power for the world to keep it at its status quo with its growing population. Vivian supported Enki's experiments but at times was terrified by the lengths he would go to channel into the next world; a place she knew was forbidden because of the programming in the nanosphere she had read.

### 3. Evo
Evo did not believe in maintaining the status quo. Evo felt that the world was already unbalanced and the only balance to be found would be in the mysteries of what the world made of itself.

She felt that a return to the natural state of things was what must be done; though she understood that much had changed since the beginning of it. Civilizations should turn to reducing their need for power and instead compact it in the simple nature of the face that the Gods were not Gods; rather architects of rules—unapologetic artists. The Gods clearly left their artifacts behind. She engineered much of the Gods technology in order to create the Idex Automata.

### 4. Nyn
On the side of Evo, Nyn also felt that the world would not survive the unbalancing required to create more and more new technologies with the nanosphere. Cultures around the world needed to be urged to reduce and live with less. Nyn was a F'myn woman and would lead here people to create their massive greenhouse cities in the Yeutta region in the North where the Ultracircus ultimately stalled.

### 5. Kiokesuimas
A myconoid. He disappeared not long after the Shattering. No one knows where he is or if he is still alive.

### 6. Horr'off
A Krunmynkind. Very good at Quodecraft and created the three Quibits that Evo gave to Able. Horr'off is still overseeing the living city of Berf on the back of the giant Silt tortoise Harko.

### 7. Tallqvist
A Dustmyn council member and scientist. He was the discoverer of the Qubit design. He has a laboratory east of the Automatic jungle and is responsible for the mess there.

### 8. Erra
A great Logicanth Scientist, Erra was a woman of the Aaraamyn peoples. She is at the city of Uchava.

### 9. Remory
The first synthoid (though legend has made him out to be a Nomex scientist). He was in large part the librarian for the council and created numerous tomes and Qubit devices that recorded the Archelux.

### 10. Fuurhif
A representative of the The F'myn people. Whereabouts unknown.

### 11. Nunin
A nomex scientist who specialized in the study of Sul and the effects of Nil. Currently at the Inverted Mountain studying the effects of the wormhole.

### 12. KlckClck
A Chimexipodian Scientist. It currently resides at the great hive East of the Inverted Mountain and is in the process of organizing a takeover of the entirety of Ur.

## Cast

Able  
Evo  
Jedidiah  
Kane  
Wacamolo  
Rilla  
The Baron Leocadia  
Vivian the Terror  
Nicolle  
Alahirah  
Xistra  
KlckClck  
Horr'off
Tet

## Character Arcs

The story circle (see below) is pretty spelled out for Able, but I need to think harder and insert the same for the other characters. Right now, Wacamolo is there to support the others and sort of be a father figure to Rilla, but what really is his own story? He's a mystic as opposed to a scientist and that should play a greater role in the story.

### Able
1. Able lives in the desert, content to do as his father wishes and look after his sick mother.
2. He loves, what he calls his mistakes, autonomous programs that he created with the help of his mother.
3. He is discovered by his father and banished from the only home he knows.
4. He is told by Ghendra that he must find the Ultracircus. He tries to deny this only to discover that his mother has died.
5. He meets people along the way and inspires them. His deontological stance sways people and even inspires those who might be considered "evil".
6. He pays a price for this several times. Cal puts him in a new body that he hates. He may also seem to die during the repair or reboot.
7. He goes back to the Idex Mortez? He could return in a symbolic sense.
8. Now he is a programmer of the world?

### Gef
1. Gef is a trader in the badlands. He is disguised and safe so long as he keeps moving.
2. He knows he has forgotten a lot. He may be thousands of years old. He is looking for the Cyclo(pedia) to perhaps give him his memory back.
3. He runs into Able, a synthezoid child. And Able can program. This, he knows, is really strange and he decides to try to protect Able and his automata.
4. He has to protect Able in lots of clever ways because he does not believe in using violence. He would rather run than fight.
5. He gets ahold of the Cyclo at the Ultracircus and uses it and Po to have his memory returned, but it is devastating because he discovers he played a significant role in the Shattering.
6. This causes him to want to destroy himself.
7. With Able's help, he is able to see that they can build the world anew. But the reboot costs him his life, which is thinks is just.
8. There is no 8. for Gef.

### Wacamolo
1. An old man of Kinton Station; he is considered the wisest and most knowledgable in the area.
2. He is old and doesn't feel that he has seen enough of the world. The only way to truly learn more is go out into the world with Able and Gef.
3. Traveling with Able and Gef puts Wacamolo in danger. Because he is old and frail, he cannot fight, but he can use his knowledge from time to time to give the group an advantage.
4. His mysticism must be challenged.
5. His search is to create a tome similar to that of Remory's pre-shattering work.
6. Cal intends to ramp up the Shattering and destroy the world.
7. When the council is reformed, he is asked to be the sage and historian of a brand new world.
8. Wacamolo has changed in that he understands that since mysticism lacks the rigor of science, it can lead down a dark path.

## Time

Ern - Dustmyn notions for hours.

## Ideas for Later:

+ Wacamolo tells a story about bees and one bee who thought he had free will.

+ The signal from the Texo Compass is intercepted and pulls the crew to Sultana Nur Waya. The city has been overtaken by Cal, Gef's "brother" a synthezoid who worked for Enki and is attempted to build an escape from the world and the Shattering. He thinks Enki was right that eternal growth over sustainability is paramount. He also believe that Enki didn't go far enough. He plans to completely destroy the Obtala and use the Ultracircus as a raft to get to the next realm. He's not evil, but like Thanos, his plan is misguided. He has Horr'off locked up.

+ What is Gef's story? Who was Gef working for? Is Wacamolo more than he lets on—like Fizban?

+ The villain of this story did what he did out of love; he didn't mean for the destruction to happen. But so long as its happened, he sees it as progress. We now know that he did it to find some infinite energy source.

+ ~~Po eats the Texo Compass~~

+ Evo was a member of the council. She alone among scientists of the council re-discovered the ability to create synthoids. She created a child synthoid in the hopes of creating a true form of optimism and balance and sustainability in opposition to Gabriel's ideas of constant growth.

+ Ghendra was Evo's student.

+ ~~The crew meets a thing like Nip but massive and dangerous.~~ The crew meets something like the mistakes in the Automatic Jungle.

+ ~~The crew has to make their way through a jungle of nanotechnology that tries to transform them.~~

+ ~~Rilla and Wacamolo show up with Arthra and stuff at the entrance to the city of Horn.~~

+ Nip becomes a swarm. Arthra learns to fly (by walking on copies of Nip).

+ Baron Leocadia sends bounty hunters after the crew.

+ The crew acquires a fighter of some kind. Do they free a mechanoman?

## The Story Circle

1. A character you can identify with
2. The character has a wish or need that is unfulfilled
3. The need or wish causes them to cross a threshold
4. They go down a road of trials
5. They are searching for something and find it (like it or not)
6. That discovery kicks their ass
7. They come back to the world they started in having gone through trials
8. Having changed


Understanding, or at least manipulating the CODE is the unrealized boon!

## Publishing

Bitly for drafts
https://bit.ly/3oswCW5