# Chapter 16

## In which Vivian meets Able

Vivian made everyone go to rooms she had made for them out of the walls of her tower—small alcoves where each of Able's friends went and stood like a toy on display. Able was unexpected. Vivian had seen the future, seen this rabble coming. But not Able. She calmly sat herself in a large chair before a massive window that looked out over even the Idex Mortez it was so high up.

Able wasn't even sure how high up they were. They had walked up stairs for what seemed hours. He didn't understand why Vivian hadn't used her powers to get them there. But then, she didn't seem tired at all. Instead she lounged in her chair and came to rest her head on her hand. Able and Ka'Rolly stood before her. She stared at them for long minutes before she spoke.

"You will obey me." She said to Able.

"Okay! What would you like?"

Her eyes glowed deep blue again. Able stared into them as they swirled and almost seemed to reach out for him. "No!" Her voice echoed through the room as loud as an avalanche. Able put his hands over his ears. Her hair raised up around her hair and crackled with electricity. "Obey me!"

"Let my friends go!" Able shouted back over the din.

"NO!"

Able fell to his knees. "Please. We mean no harm. We came to find—"

"What are you?"

"I don't know. I've been told many things. Some people tell me I'm a child. Some people tell me I'm an abomination. Some people tell me—"

"Enough!" Vivian leaned toward Able from her chair, "Obey me."

Able stared.

"OBEY. ME."

Able smiled.

Vivian leaned back. Her hair fell down around her shoulders and turned white. Her eyes faded and turned to normal glassy light blue eyes. Able could suddenly see an immense sadness in them. She frowned.

"What is... what are you made of?"

"I don't know."

"How can you not know? You are an automaton."

"Sorry."

"You were made. Who made you?"

"Evo."

"What!?" screamed Vivian. She sat up straight in her chair and light poured out of her body, up into the giant chamber. "How dare you speak the name of a council member?"

"Evo was my mother."

"You virulent garbage nonsense—how dare you!?"

"I dare what?"

"How dare you name a member of the council, you insolent wretch."

"Council?"

"The council! THE council!"

"I don't know what a council is!"

"Evo! You knew Evo!"

"Yes. She was my mother."

"Evo was not your mother, you little wretch."

"Um, she used to tell me that I could see colors where no one else could."

Again, Vivian seemed to catch her breath and lean back in the chair. She breathed in deep. "Evo told you What?"

"She used to tell me that I could see colors that no one else could—would ever be able to."

Vivian's eyes filled with tears. "Oh, Evo. My Evo." She put her faced in her hands and sobbed.

Able stood up from the ground and placed his hands behind his back, feeling sad for this woman.

"You said 'was'—she is gone?"

"Yes."

Vivian stood and glided without footsteps to where Able was. She put her hands around his cheeks, tears still drying on her own. "She is gone and she left you in her stead."

"She also gave me some cubes that I used to make some of my friends." Able looked down. "You took them apart."

She turned away from Able and walked back to her chair. "If you are a creation of Evo, you will tell me about her and how you came to be here. Even if Evo made you, why in the world would she let you wander free?"

"My mother always told me I was free."

Vivian scoffed, "That's not the Evo I know."

"My mother—"

"She is not your mother! She is your maker!"

Able surprised himself by straightening up and saying with conviction, "My *mother* always told me I could change this world."

"Again, not the Evo I know."

"Would you like me to show you her grave!?" shouted Able. "Because I would very much like to go back there and quit this stupid business where people I meet get hurt and suffer and you're just trapping my only friends and if you really know my mother then I don't understand any of this! Let my friends go!" Now Able began to cry.

"No."

Again she looked to Ka'Rolly, who had backed away from the whole scene. She waved with her hand and pulled its head off, floating the dustfish in its little chamber over to herself. It sat in the air next to her. She pointed at the body of what was Ka'Rolly and split her fingers apart and it also unravel into a simple square; like a diagram of its former self. She pointed and it floated to where the remains of Po and Nip hung on the wall as well.

She leaned at Able and sneered, "I don't know yet what manner of illusion or trap you are—sent by Evo or Gabriel or any one of them—but you will never leave my tower. And if you want your friends to ever go free, you will tell me everything I want to know."

Able stood hopeless, helpless. He could feel the floor changing around him, and a table formed out of it, gently rising up behind him, and lifting him off the ground. His arms and legs extended outward without his wanting them to and he felt frozen to the table's surface, staring at the ceiling of the chamber.

Vivian's face appeared over him. "You will tell me everything I want to know and then I will find out what you are really made of."

* * *

Able talked. He talked more than he thought he ever had in his life. He talked about the Idex Mortez, about Evo, about learning to make automations and mistake, about his father and brother, why he left home, about meeting Ghendra, about Gef. He went on about giant centipedes and the Delphine meteor, about the Dustfish, understanding the world and how big it was. And on and on.

Vivian walked in a slow circle around him like those tigers outside of Horn had done. She listened carefully, he could see it, but she never said a word until he came to the Baron. At first all she said, "Really?" And at that, she shifted the platform that Able was laying on, so that it rotated until he was right side up. "Go on." He took a breath and kept talking about the Baron appearing as a monster and all But mostly how sad he was that the people seemed to have nothing while right underneath them were magnificent trees and more than enough water.

"That little wretch," said Vivian. She stared at Able long and hard. They were at eye level with one another, he, restrained by the platform but floating in the air. "I'm going to show you something, Able." She said it like a threat and so Able said nothing in reply. She raised her arms slowly up from her side and as she did, it looked for all the world to him like the world was burning in a small straight line that surrounded them both. The line raised up from the ground with her arms and it crackled with a blue energy. The whole room seemed to transform following the line, until when it was gone, they were not even in the room anymore, but in the city square in the City of Horn.

Vivian turned to stand next to Able and called out, as loud as a thunder clap, "Baron!"

Able and Vivian waited together for a few moments in silence. The doors to the Baron's tower opened and out marched row after row of metal mechanomen, their heavy feet slamming on the stone of the square and sending any curious onlooker running. Able looked to Vivian, frightened about what they would do in the face of this onslaught.

Vivian meanwhile seemed to grow a foot at least in height. She looked at the mechanomen like they were nothing and whispered, "Silly, little fool." It looked to Able like she performed some sort of calculation in the air. Then she slammed her hands together in front of herself in a clasp and slowly pulled them apart. As she pulled them apart, each mechnoman also came apart, there hundreds of parts separating into the air; the people inside of them hanging in the air limp and sleeping. 

"Don't hurt them!" shouted Able. Vivian seemed to lose her focus and whipped her head around at Able. When she did, all the metal parts and people fell to the ground with cacophony. "What!?" She shouted at Able.

Able said meekly, "Don't hurt them."

She sneered at Able, but turned her attention to the top of the tower, at the platform leading to the Baron's throne room. Just over the edge, Able could make out the Baron's head, peering over the side of the platform. Vivian reached up and seemed to grab the platform, like a trick of perspective that Able couldn't understand, and she ripped it off the tower and slammed it into the ground in front of her, sending chunks of rock everywhere.

The Baron lay face down on the ground in front of Vivian. He peered up from the ground and began to pick himself up. "Don't get up, wretch."

The baron obeyed and stayed on the ground on his stomach and elbows, face down. "Do you know what this lost little creature has told me about your activities?"

"Uh... uh..." Stammered the Baron.

"Speak!"

"If... if you know him, then you know him to be a fool. He doesn't know what he speaks of, my lady."

"Your lady? I think not. Today call me master."

"Yes, master."

"There was balance and energy here enough to let all of these people live in comfort. What are these stories he tells me of duplication and turning yourself into monsters?"

"Parlor tricks, my la—master."

"You lie!"

"I merely wanted to protect—"

"Quiet! I know your heart." She folded her arms in front of her. "And what of the museum?"

"It is perfectly safe and totally cared for. I would never dare—"

"You *did* dare. You dared use my knowledge of the nanosphere for yourself, you little tinkerer. What of these awful creations of yours? This is how you care for those I put under your watch?"

"I thought it was reasonable—um—in the name of Science—"

"You know *nothing* of Science. Nothing!" She turned her palm outwards and the Baron was brought to his feet, off his feet in the air and held there. Seemingly taller than even before, Vivian bent over to meet the Baron face to face. "You know technology," she uttered with contempt. She reached out and ripped a machine off of his belt and held in front of the baron's face. "You should not utter the word Science."

The baron's face was frozen in fear. "Yes, master."

"Stop this!" Shouted Able again.

Vivian spun around to glare at him. "You again? Silence."

"No. I do not need your permission to speak."

Vivian gestured and tried to manipulate the space around Able but nothing happened. She screamed in rage.

"Oh my," whispered the Baron.

"Just fix it," said Able calmly.

Vivian looked puzzled. "What?"

"Just fix it. I know you can. Just fix it."

Suddenly, Vivian's face became worn and tired. "No, Able. There is no fixing it. You don't understand."

"I do understand. I understand that he is cruel and broke this place and that you don't need to be like him and that you can fix it."

Vivian placed a hand on Able's face. He floated down to the ground. The platform he had been on melted into the ground and disappeared. Vivian knelt down in front of him. "I see you, sister."

Able couldn't understand this. Her sadness was palpable as she held her hand on his cheek. Then she whispered, "Very well, Evo."

The world seemed to shake and then many things happened at once.