# Chapter 19

## In which the crew make a plan and a discovery.

"Of course, if we head North, our travels will be blocked by the Silt Sea," Wacamolo said, running his finger across a map. "Gef, I just think that if this machine city had been anywhere here in the south, I would have heard of it. You also. You've been from the Idex Mortez to Monte Gamberel. One of us would have heard a report."

Gef stared at the huge gap in the map that was the Silt Sea. He had never dreamed of attempting a crossing. He rolled Po back and forth on the table, Po enjoying the attention and purring. "I don't know Waca. On the one hand, I want that cyclo. On the other, people don't come back from that trip."

"Dustmyn," agreed Waca.

"Dustmyn and Gaea knows what else."

Nicolle looked up from her piles of notes. "You believe in Gaea?"

Gef looked at her. "Yes." He cocked his head. "Is that strange?"

"No, no. I know enough about machines—"

"Synthezoid, please."

Nicolle blinked and blushed. "Um. Yes. Sorry. Synthezoid. I know enough to know you can make up your own mind. It's just that Gaea is the maker of growth and organic things. I mean, didn't your kind... um..."

"Just say it."

Having never spoke to an automan, Nicolle found the legend hard to say. "Didn't your people destroy nature?"

Gef sighed. "That's a lie. I don't know who fabricated and spread it, but no. We synthezoids did not do that. Our legends tell us that we were created to protect, to curate. Clearly, we failed, but even Lady Vivian said the destruction is due to her husband Gabriel."

Nicolle's eyes grew wide. "She spoke to you of him?"

"Yes."

Her face lost its color. "She has never spoken to us of him. We know of him, but she's never uttered his name in our presence. What did you—how did you convince her to..." She trailed off.

"Wasn't me. It was Able."

"So strange." She paused in thought, looking out the window at the now rejuvenated, beautiful countryside. "Really, she had not said much of anything in the last four hundred years or so."

Wacamolo interjected. "Excuse me, ma'lady. How would you know that?"

"I've been Vivian's protege for at least three hundred years."

Wacamolo's jaw dropped and Gef looked stunned. Wacamolo said, "I'm sorry—I know it can be rude to ask—but you are how old?"

"I am five hundred or so. We don't really keep track," she flashed a brilliant smile.

Gef and Wacamolo looked at each other. Gef said, "You need to take better care of yourself, old man."

"Unbelievable."

Nicolle looked perplexed. "I don't understand."

Gef pointed at Waca and said, "He's eighty!"

Furrowing her brow, Nicolle said, "You look to be at least a thousand."

Wacamolo just shook his head. "Should I ever be so lucky."

"Living in the desert must be very hard."

"Ha!" sniffed Wacamolo. Gef was laughing.

"And how old are you, Gef?"

Gef stopped laughing and shrugged. "I don't know. I haven't known for a long time."

"Curious. You are both very curious," and she began writing a number of things down in her notes.

"Well," said Wacamolo, "at least I'm a novelty."

Gef stared at Nicolle as she scribbled, and the others of Boisenval in the room. Were they even nomex by any definition he could think of? Surely not. Lady Vivian must have done something to the valley, something to change the air or maybe use the nanosphere—then, for reasons he couldn't fathom—Gef had an idea.

* * *

Able and Rilla scratched Arthra on her nose and she made a pleasant and quiet chittering sound. Cara watched in amazement and the Nips swirled around one another while searching the ceiling of the stable.

"So, you children rode this creature in from the desert?"

"Yeah. She's fast," said Rilla. "She even outran a meteor—tell her, Able."

Able looked to Cara, "She outran a meteor."

Cara had no idea what the children were talking about. She just said, "For such young eyes, you have seen so many things."

"Yeah," said Able.

Then, without prompt, Rilla said, "Able can see your b-o-o-o-nes."

"Oh," said Cara with a start. "No thank you."

Able pushed Rilla lightly, "Don't tell people that. It makes them think I'm weird."

"You are weird," replied Rilla with a shove back.

"Please, children, don't shove."

"Why not?" Asked Rilla.

"It's not calmly."

"What's that?"

"Oh. Well. Um. It just mean that one's goal should not be to create a lot of excitement. Things turn out better if you approach them with open eyes and a calm heart."

Able nodded. "I do that."

"Except around me," said Rilla.

"Cause you're a meat lamp."

"Hey! Shut up, bolts for brains!"

"Children! Please! This language is terrible."

But it was too late Able was chasing Rilla around the stable with the Nips right behind him. They performed a hop and blocked Rilla's path, where Able caught up to her and then didn't know what to do. Rilla tackled him into the hay and they rolled around on the ground tussling.

"Children! Stop! We don't do that here. Please!" Cara tried to separate them but she felt wrong grabbing either of them, she hovered over them while the Nips got in her way and blinked in different colors. "My word! What chaos!"

But Rilla and Able stopped on their own, Rilla to catch her breath. She threw hay at Able, "Metal pants."

Able laughed and threw hay back, "Tuber for brains."

Rilla sighed hard and rolled her eyes, "I'm not a vegetable, Able."

"I know you are, but what am I?"

"That's stupid, Able."

"I know you are, but what am I?"

"Shut. Up."

"Children, I am begging you. Please stop this kind of talk—it is so offensive."

"What's that mean?" Asked Able looking up.

"It means it's very hard to hear without getting upset. You are upsetting me."

"Oh." Able looked sorry and he and Rilla got up and brushed each other off. "We're sorry. We were just playing."

Cara stared in wonder. "Such terrible behavior, but it is also so odd to see you both even be friends."

"Why?" asked Rilla.

"Becuase Able is a machine."

"No," said Rilla, "a machine is like a lever or a wheel or something. Able is a symthemazoid?" She looked to Able for help.

Able said, "Synthezoid." He looked at Cara. "But I don't care. Rilla is my best friend."

"Oh, Able!" Rilla shouted and hugged him.

Just then, Gef and Nicolle and Ka'Rolly, eventually followed by Wacamolo and a few other Boisenval nomans, ran into the stable, Gef holding Po. "Able! We've got to try something! Right now! C'mon! Outside!"

Everyone moved out of the stable. Arthra turned as much as she could to watch. Once outside in the courtyard around the tower, Gef handed Po to Able. "Po, show us the Ultracircus." Po did as requested and a light model of the walking machine city appeared. "Now, Able, like you have with other things, I want you to concentrate very hard and ask 'Where is the ultra circus?' In your mind. Don't think of anything else but where it is. Maybe even try to feel it—reach out for it."

Able did as requested and concentrated very hard, but nothing seemed to be happening. He closed his eyes. Then, without request, the Nips began orbiting around Po and Able. The flew faster and faster and faster until they became glowing blurs of lines around him like electrons around a nucleus. Po began to vibrate and the image of the Ultracircus grew in size and brightness, even in the daylight. Any of the nomans had to look away or block their eyes, but Gef kept staring.

A massive laser fired from Po and shot off North over the mountains. Gef jumped up, "Yes! Yes! Yes!" Able opened his eyes and looked at the blue beam emitting from his little friend wth a very quiet hum. He moved a little to one side, and the beam seems to shift as though it were anchored to something somewhere else. The Nips all slowed and then dropped to the ground. "Uh oh," said Able.

Able handed Po to Gef and attended to the Nips. Gef held Po and smiled, "I told you," he said to Po, patting it. "You can stop now. We can do that again later."

The nomans all mumbled to each other in amazement, with Waca crossing his arms in pride. They had never seen such science without Vivian present. Able picked up the Nips and cradled them. "They'll be okay. We need to find electrol."

The boisneval nomans discussed this and Rayfe said, "We don't know what this electrol is."

Wacamolo said, "It won't look like much to you; just dust."

"Yes," said Nicolle. "There is a chamber in the vaults filled with a glassy, dust substance. Vivian would never explain it."

"Please," said Able. "Take us there?"