# Chapter 27

## The Big Dig

The crew were sitting around in a circle around some of the grub orbs. Ka’Rolly in particular seemed very fascinated by the objects, holding one in its hands and alternately tapping on the glass with its mechanical fingers and then tapping on its own head, the pitch of the glass between the two being different. Rilla and Able sat and watched with amusement and discussed what it might be thinking.

“Ka’Rolly just wants a friend,” said Able. “There’s no one else like them.”

“I think they likes the music,” argued Rilla. “If they’re lonely, why don’t you make another one?”

“I need something my mother gave me.”

“What’s that?”

“It’s hard to explain.” Able scratched his head. “It’s like a… it’s like Wacamolo’s game. It’s a cube sort of thing and I can add pieces and get them to move, but I need the game board.”

Just then, an enormous amount of yelling came from down one of the large passageways leading out of the chamber. Gef stood up from their huddle, “She’s here.”

Wacamolo cried out, “I’ll be a wermel’s backside! You were right.”

Approaching Alharih, Gef said, “You told your people not to hurt her?”

“I did. I’m sure all we’re hearing is a little bit of shock. It’s not every day we encounter such a creature, Keeper.” Alharih looked around the small group. “It’s not every day we Dustmyn encounter anything like any of you,” he said, smiling. Dustmyn, not keen to emote, have a smile that barely registers as a curve, but Gef could see it. “We trust you to set things right.”

Gef rubbed his hands, “It’s a long shot, but it’s the best I’ve got.”

Just then, Arthra pushed her head into the chamber, being tailed by a few panicked Dustmyn who were waving their arms, attempting to corral her with no success. Gef walked up to her and gave her a grand hug, scrubbing her mandibles and brushing dirt off her eyes. “Hey, girl. Didn’t want to hang out with your fellow insects?”

Arthra shook herself all the way down her length, flinging dirt everywhere. All of the rest of the crew ran to her, shouting her name and petting her, cheering.

Nicolle approached Gef in the din and asked, “So when do we get to hear this hair-brained scheme of yours?”

“Right now. Arthra here can’t dig through some kinds of stone, but everything on this peninsula is sediment—clay and compacted sand. She can tear right through that.”

“So, we’re digging our way out?” asked Wacamolo.

“No,” said Nicolle. “I bet we’re digging our way *in*.”

“Actually, we’re sort of doing both.” Gef paused for fun. “The Dustmyn now live in a series of these underground havens dotted all over the plains, and most of them, according to Alharih are interconnected. We need to create a tunnel that goes from the Chimexapod hive back to the automatic jungle.”

“You’re going to bring that technological nightmare to the hive? And then what? That gray goo will devour everything.” said Nicolle.

“Even more,” added Wacamolo, “digging like that could take months!”

Gef cautioned, “Kvet is the Dustmyn’s last above-ground city. Every one of them will join the cause. It may take time, but we’ve got Arthra too. She’s fast. And once the monkeys have consumed the hive, we can use Po to deactivate them again, then clean up.”

“You’re mad,” said Wacamolo. “But then, if I had a better plan, I would suggest it.”

* * *

Wacamolo turned out to be mostly right. Even with the help of the great Arthra, the dig project took the better part of a month. The crew stayed occupied in various ways, always coming together at the end of the day in a small townhouse that the Dustmyn had provided for them. They discovered that the city of Kvet was much larger beneath the surface of the steppes of Hargala. There were levels and levels of streets and buildings, stores and markets, government buildings. The nomadic appearance that the Dustmyn presented on the surface was in no way reflected in the brilliant city life underground.

Gef mostly spent his days with Arthra and Wacamolo and Po and some of the Dustmyn engineers, winding their way through the underground, making a tunnel back to the automatic jungle. The engineers re-enforced their work with massive iron beams and in some places, large iron pipes that the Dustmyn normally used for other functions in the city, like plumbing and electricity.

Wacamolo mapped and diagrammed everything he could for he had set upon creating his own version of "Remory’s Guide to the Archelux". He could see the beautiful chitin-bound tome with gold leaf lettering in his mind: “Wacamolo’s Guide to the Modern Archelux”. He kept Po with him for references and he also discovered that Po had an ability to trace some light sculptures to paper by lightly singeing the pages. His own drawing abilities were acceptable, but Po’s precision was unbeatable.

Able split his time between exploring with Rilla and studying with Nicolle. The student of Vivian had taken over a room in the lower portion of their townhouse and was busy constructing various machines, some of which she then used to make tools. But with Able, the pair mostly studied Nip and Ka’Rolly in an attempt to surmise how Vivian had multiplied Nip.

One afternoon, a young Dustmyn knocked at the door and introduced herself as the apprentice of Tallqvist, a well-known Dustmyn scientist and one-time council member. Vivian was rather ecstatic at discovering that she had a compatriot in her midst; Xistra was her name and she believed that she could offer assistance with the automata.

"Our what?" Asked Able.

"Your devices; the ones you call your friends."

On cue, Nip flew down from the ceiling corners where it had been keeping a vigil and surrounded Xistra's head. But instead of being scared like many of the other Dustmyn in the entrance to the city, she smiled. "I've never seen one that could fly!"

This prompted Vivian to ask, "So you have seen these kinds of devices before?"

"Yes. Tallqvist, my teacher, used to create them all the time." She paused and looked at Able, "I think. Do they possess qubits?"

Able shrugged. "I don't know what that is."

"It's a small cube with lots of lines all over it."

"Yes!" Able shouted. "Yes they do. What is it?"

"Tallqvist told me that they were crystallized nanosphere."

Vivian broke in again, "Where is Tallqvist now?"

"I'm not sure. There are rumors that he was lost in the Automatic Jungle."

Rilla and Able shared expressions of fear. Vivian shook here head. "We passed through there—a truly horrifying place. We were almost consumed by the creatures there."

Xistra looked down, clearly sad. Vivian approached her and put here hands on her shoulders, "If it helps, I also don't know where my mentor went—she was Vivian of Boisenval."

Placing her hand on Vivian's, Xistra replied, "It does help. Thank you." She then plucked one of Nip out of the air and turned it over in her hands. "I have always wondered if I could construct a Qubit. If I could, I might be able to create a communication device or a device to locate him with."

Able stepped over to her apprehensively, "Yes, but I like Nip the way it is."

Xistra smiled at him. "Don't worry. I couldn't change this one if I wanted to." She knelt down in front of Able and made several gestures and then somehow pulled Nip's outer shell open and showed him the maze-like indentations on the interior. "The qubits can't be re-etched once created. They dictate the behavior and progression of the automata and solidify once turned on."

Able looked to Vivian, "That means that my mother knew what the mistakes would do?"

"It would appear so, Able."

"Who was your mother?" asked Xistra, somewhat skeptical that Able would even have one.

"Evo."

Xistra dropped the Nip where it floated to the ground and then zipped back to its compatriots. "Your mother was the scientist Evo!?"

"Yes."

"But... how?"

"How else? She made me."

Xistra looked to Vivian for confirmation, who nodded. Xistra looked at Able again with a newfound wonder. "Wow."

"Thank you," said Able.

"At any rate," added Xistra, "if I wanted to build a tracking qubit, I would have to start from scratch, and I have no idea how that's done."

"Vivian copied Nip. There used to be only one."

"Oh. Duplication? That's easy." Xistra reached for one of the Nips, who dodged her. All three began fluttering around. With great dexterity, Xistra jumped up on the lab table and then into the air, capturing one of the Nips in flight. She landed on the ground and squatted, wrapping her whole body around the automata. She worked for a minute, and when she stood, she had a Nip in each hand.

Each one promptly flew away from her and the four Nips flew in small orbits around each other making a cacophony of noise, almost as if they were introducing themselves. Then, they paired off and went to opposite sides of the makeshift lab. "Amazing!" shouted Able. "Yay!" shouted Rilla.

"Yeah. Duplication's no trouble. Except—" Xistra walked over to Ka'Rolly, who began to back up. "Don't worry, big fella', I won't bite." She looked Ka'Rolly up and down. "This one's different."

Vivian and Rilla and Able all joined Xistra in standing around Ka'Rolly and staring at it. "This looks like you integrated the sul with quode." She looked to Able and Vivian for agreement, but both shook their head. Able furrowed his brow and said, "Ka was an automata and Rolly is a Dustfish. That's why we call it Ka'Rolly."

Xistra smiled, "I think we're saying the same thing, actually. Because Rolly is part of the system, it can't be duplicated. Unlike quode, sul can't be duplicated."

"Is sul organic matter and quode inorganic?" asked Nicolle.

"They're certainly related, but it's more to do with the manner in which replication occurs. With sul matter, replication is never perfect, but with quode, the replication is perfect."

Rilla asked, "Why?"

Xistra shrugged, "It's a mystery. It's just something in the nature of the Obtala."

"The huh?" Asked Rilla.

"I can field this one," said Nicolle to Xistra. Turning to Rilla, she said "The Obtala is the whole of everything. Everything on the ground, in the ground, in the sky, even off-world."

"Obtala," said Rilla to Able who nodded.

"Well," said Nicolle. "This is just fantastic, Xistra. We would love to have you around. We are working here on various experiments while our friend Gef works on the Big Dig, as they're calling it. You're welcome here in our little, makeshift lab any time you like. Come every day even."

"Thank you!" said Xistra with enthusiasm. "My people do not have a great tolerance for science. Other than Tallqvist, who was feared as much as respected, there isn't really anyone for me to discuss science with."

"Why don't people like science?" Asked Rilla. "Science is fun! Look!" She had been practicing the logicanth that created the small cyclone, and had become quite adept at it, being able to create the dust devil in mere seconds now.  It spun around the room and faded away.

"Wonderful!" Said Xistra. "You are quite the little scientist, Rilla." She paused and looked to the door of the lab, as if someone might be listening. "It's just, my people blame science for whatever ruined the Steppes of Hargala. My mentor didn't believe that it was the fault of science. I'm not so sure. But I do know, it won't be fixed without science."

Able said, "We're looking for the Ultracircus for that very reason."

"Really? The Ultracircus? I didn't believe it was real."

"It's real and we know where it is." said Able crossing his arms with confidence. Then he looked at his feet, and then up at Nicolle. "Sort of."

"We have acquired a Texo Compass—one we believe to be linked to the Ultracircus—have you heard of such a thing?"

"Heard of it? That's what I would like to build to locate Tallqvist!"

"Well then, keep coming to the lab and we'll endeavor to make that happen."

Xistra smiled brightly. "What other manner of experiments are you conducting?"

Nicolle gestured to a sphere of glass that had within it a swirling mass of charcoal-colored particles. The particles moved in a singular fashion, like an angry wave. The crew had taken to calling the stuff, the Gray Goo. While building the tunnel, Gef had gone back into the jungle and sampled some of the stuff.

Nicole and Xistra bent over the work bench and peered into the sphere. "I believe it is a mutated form of the nanosphere. Whereas the nanosphere is generally inert unless interacted with, this substance will attempt to convert any form of organic matter that it finds into itself."

"That's horrible."

"Yes. And unfortunately, it makes for an equally horrible weapon."

* * *

While Vivian and Rilla and Able were making their new friend (and new Nips), Gef and his compatriot Alharih were standing in their own headquarters, looking out over a model of the lower levels of Kvet and the tunnels being constructed in either direction. One tunnel, the one nearest completion had moved out from where Gef and Alharih were and turned upward, pointing at the bottom center of the Chimexapod hive. The other tunnel, the one making its way to the cliffs of Moher, would be completed within two weeks.

Gef was drumming his fingers on the table as Alharih moved this or that item on the table to update where their engineering teams were and demarcating spots that might need to be better re-enforced. Alharih stopped his planning though, and turned to Gef, "You seem nervous, friend."

"Nervous? Maybe. Concerned."

"I'm fairly confident in our plan and construction. I don't think the creatures from the jungle are going to escape our route."

"No, that's not it. I agree with you. The construction is good. The plan is good. It's just, I have known Chimexapods and this invasion of theirs is strange. Moreover, I have dealt first hand with the Grey Goo and it is a horror; all-consuming. If we unleash this on the Chimexapods, thousands will be consumed."

"I needn't remind you that thousands of my people have died at the hands of these creatures."

"They're more than creatures, Alharih; they're a people. And I don't believe in an eye for an eye."

"You would have us give up?—this far along in our planning and work?" Alharih was visibly upset.

"No. Not at all. This is what must be done. But I also feel it is a last resort." Gef looked up from the table and at Alharih. "I would speak with the Chimexapod leader. Give them one last chance to leave, to retreat, or—who knows—bargain."

Alharih took a deep breath and put his hand on Gef's shoulder. "You are a wise daemon, my friend. We could avoid much bloodshed—on both sides. I am not so sure they could be trusted."

"I need to speak with Nicolle and see about creating a way to contain the Grey Goo locally. If we could devise such a method, we could show the Chimexapod hive what they are potentially up against. We could warn them with a demonstration."

"I do believe that is worth trying. But I am concerned that you are losing the mettle to act otherwise should they refuse."

"I'm not." Gef sighed. "In fact, when I go to the hive, I will make sure to leave you the means to release the storm should you decide to. Or... if I don't come back."