# Chapter 30

## In which the crew meets their new silt-glider captain who has interesting information.

To Able's mind, the city of Siltstone was a pretty affair. As the crew came down out of the caverns of Kvet and the surrounding hills, Able thought that Siltstone looked like a mass of open books. Each building was open to the sky and yet, the pages of the books were frozen while turning, and all turning away from an undulating plane of color that was the Silt Sea itself.

The Silt Sea was amazing to Able. Unlike the Idex Mortez which was all manner of jagged edges and fingers of towers, the sea was as smooth as cloth and stretched off as far as one could see. Only as the sea got close to its edge could any motion be seen; a gentle back and forth where the lilac color of the silt grew more intense in long lines like melting glass. Wacamolo told Able and Rilla that those lines were called waves.

Then there were the silt-gliders, which Able and Rilla, from the back of Arthra, began to make out and asked Wacamolo for more and more explanations. Wacamolo asked Po to illustrate a silt-glider and sat with the children to show the wings and how they maneuvered and could move in this axis or that, but none of it mattered. Rilla and Able were simply a mass of questions. Wacamolo looked to Gef and Nicolle having a laugh at his expanse from the front of Arthra. The old nomex shrugged. He couldn't answer one question before the children had ten more. Finally, he said, "Why don't we just enjoy the view."

Gef, who had been to Siltstone fifty or a hundred years ago, admired how the architecture had developed. The roofs of the buildings were ultimately built to take on the winds of the Silt Sea, which could be devastating at times. He had been present for a windstorm once and hid in underground shelters with some Dustmyn for what must have been a few days. The wind kicked up the silt to the point that even with his extravision he could only see a few feet, making out outlines of Dustmyn, covered in armor and masks, working with hooks to just keep themselves on the ground.

When the silt was being kicked up wby the sea winds, it could cut you—well, not Gef—like tiny razorblades. The Dustmyn from Kvet and the plateau seemed different than those living near the Silt Sea. Their armor was more prevalent, less concerned with camouflage and more aerodynamic with small wings built into it; obviously to protect against the Silt. But at the moment, as the crew entered Siltstone, the sky was clear and the sea was calm and most everyone in the city was wearing flowing robes and dresses. Only those Dustmyn who were of some government role wore armor.

Then, there were the very occasional but undeniable presence of the Krunmyn. These individuals towered over the Dustmyn around them, twice their height and width, craggly skin like stone, with massive black eyes. The Krunmyn wore barely any armor or clothing at all. They also barely moved compared to the surrounding Dustmyn. Of the three Gef saw on their approach to the docks, they were simply standing or looking over some wares, and could have been mistaken for statues.

Nicolle leaned over to Gef and said under her breath, "I'm trying not stare," indicating one of the Krunmyn with her eyes.

Gef smiled back, "It'd be fine if you did. I doubt they would  notice." Gef pointed at a scene, an entrance to a shop, where a Krunmyn was standing holding a create. The two shopkeepers appeared to be busily ignoring the Krunmyn. "I'd being willing to bet that Krunmyn is selling them that create. They've said they're greetings, maybe even named a price, and are just waiting for a response. It'll take an ern before the Krunmyn says anything back."

"An ern!?"

"Well, not an ern, but you'll want to get a few things done while waiting."

"And we're following the Texo Compass north to their land? How will we ever get anything done?"

"I don't know. It'll be interesting. We're at the edge of my memories. I don't recall ever having been north of the Silt Sea."

* * *

As the crew's belongings were loaded on to a silt-glider called  the Craft Siltmare, they were simultaneously introduced to its captain, Ona Soiree. She shook each of the crew's hands heartily, even little Rilla and Able. "Word of your deeds has come to me from Lord Alharih. Upon hearing the stories, I fought for the right to bare you on my glider. It will be honor and a privilege."

Gef spoke, "It's an honor for us as well. We have to readily admit that we are not sure where we're going, so it is good to have help."

Nicolle looked at a large bandage on on Captain Ona's arm and turned to Xistra and quietly said, "She's not being metaphorical is she?"

Xistra just shook her head.

"Can we get on board?" asked Able.

Captain looked at Able again and knelt down in front of him and Rilla. "You may not, Little master and Lady, until you know three things." She stood again and faced the group. "You may think me dramatic, but I assure you, I am not."

"One, playing at the shores of the Silt Sea may seem a curiosity to you, fun even. Hear me: once we leave the port, falling in the Silt Sea is certain, absolute death." The captain let the word linger and made eye contact with each child and then repeated it, "Death." She looked to others in the group as well, who all nodded solemnly. She paused on Ka'Rolly and raised her eyebrows.

"This is Ka'Rolly," Xistra said.

"It is a Dustfish in a suit?"

Some in the crew exchanged glances. Nicolle spoke, "We often find that they are slightly more than the sum of the parts."

The captain crossed her arms. The answer would have to suffice. "Well, I have never known anyone or anything to survive the Sea with the exception of Dur'la. They appear as mountains on the sea. That is the second thing you must know. If you see one, you will be tempted to marvel at it—they are hypnotizing—and I don't blame you. But! Instead, you must not hesitate to alert me or any member of the crew. If we encounter Dur'la, we must take immediate action. We cannot afford to get caught in their wake or get wrecked upon their backs. Again, this fate means certain death—and this time for us all." The Captain checked in with the children again. "Do you understand rule two?"

Rilla and Able were wide-eyed and stunned at this point but managed to nod.

The Captain looked to Ka'Rolly again who appeared to be bent over and examining a bug on the ground. She turned to the adults and said, "I have to ask, does... it understand what I'm saying?"

The four adults exchanged glances and shrugged and shook their heads.

"It's very unnerving to have some... one on the vessel that does not understand the rules of the sea."

Ka'rolly had picked up the bug and stepped forward to offer it out to the Captain.

"Um. Thank you." The captain took the insect and looked helplessly to the crew.

Able said, "The only thing I have ever seen Ka'Rolly do—and I've known them their whole life—is help. They'll obey the rules."

The Captain, even more perplexed now, asked Able, "Can I put this down now?"

Ka'Rolly took a massive curtsey, and Able, "I guess so."

The Captain dropped the bug and Ka'Rolly lunged faster than the wind and caught the creature before it hit the ground. The Captain stepped back in shock. The crew all chuckled, but the Captain just stared back at them as if they were all crazy. Wacamolo stepped forward and said, "I believe it would be appropriate for you to meet two more of our friends at this juncture."

He took Po out of a satchel he was wearing and held it out. "This is Po." Po created a light display that was an exact replica of the Craft Siltmare. The captain could see her own ship in miniature and amazed, tried to touch it, but then the image turned into one of her smiling back at her and waving. Again, she reared back, and shouted "By the Eye of Sa-ah!"

Xistra took a cue, and said, "Sorry to shock you one more time, Captain Ona," but this Nip. Nip, who had taken a liking to Xistra since she duplicated them, came up off her soldiers, and spun in a halo around Xistra's head, flinging bright light out and up. The Captain covered her mouth with both hands, her former sternness removed. "Alharih tried to describe these things to me, but seeing it. What manner of quode is this? I've never spied anything like it!"

Gef said, "We'll have plenty of time to tell you what little know on the voyage. Perhaps you should tell us rule three?"

Captain Ona Soiree tried to regain her composure but failed. Even though she clearly had given passengers rule three any hundreds of times, she repeated this time without an echo of sternest. "When the ship is at sea, it is a land to itself. It is my land and I am the law..." She trailed off, still staring at Nip spinning in orbit around Xistra's head, her head cocked.

Able said, "We know the rules now, can we get on board?"

The Captain, wide-eyed and confused stepped to one side and waved her arm out to the gangplank. "Yes. Yes, I suppose you may." With that Able and Rilla checked with adults and when no one objected, they ran off laughing, hand in hand. The rest of the crew boarded less quick, with Gef being the last to go.

Gef stepped forward and put his hand on the Captain's shoulder. "I promise, you get used to it."

Captain Ona looked Gef up and down, "I'm not even used to seeing you, Keeper."

Gef put his hands up, "Please. If you don't mind, don't call me that. Just Gef will be fine."

Captain Ona shook her head. "This is going be my strangest voyage ever. I can feel it in the silt." She stood still, but as  he turned to follow the rest of the crew, she said, "Just a moment, please, Keep—Gef."

"Yes?"

"You are Daemon, are you not?"

"Definitely, please don't call me that. I prefer the term Synthezoid."

"I can see what you look like. Tell me this: have not lived for thousands of years?"

Gef looked to the glider and then past it to the horizon and watch the sea undulate for a moment. "The truth is I don't know." He looked back to Ona. "I know what I look like. I know what people think I am. But, if you're right, then I'm ten thousand years old. And I'm not. And the legends would suggest that whatever I am—a daemon—then there shouldn't be children. And you saw him yourself. He's the only one of my kind I have seen in a thousand years. It's all legend."

"And the Ultracircus? Isn't that what you and your friends are looking for? You have a compass that points at it."

"I don't know where that compass is pointing. I hope it's the Ultracircus because that little macrobot we call Po has so many answers, but not all the ones we're looking for. I'm hoping that the Ultracircus will have a lot more."

"Very well. There is something else you should know." Gef listened. "Someone has been here in Siltstone looking for you and your group. I don't know much. I know that none of the captains in Siltstone that were interested in transporting you spoke a word of the letters we received from Lord Alharih. But we captains have our ears to the ground, too—especially after what happened in Kvet."

"A Chimexapod? That doesn't make sense. We gave--"

"No. A being unlike anyone here or the captains who ride the Silt Sea have ever seen. Some say a scientist."

Gef froze. "A scientist."

"That is the rumor. I don't believe it, but I thought you should know. It is said, by some of my own trusted people, that this being appears in a cloud of smoke, asks questions and then disappears in a cloud of smoke." Ona closed an eye and looked at Gef, "Can you do such a thing?"

"No. But I do know that only a scientist could do such a thing." Gef looked Ona in the eyes again. "But seeing as how I have met one and a half of such scientists, it does not necessarily bode poorly for us." Gef look back at the silt-glider, "Hopefully, this stranger is a friend."

Captain Ona Soiree crossed her arms and laughed. "Talking fish and Dustmyn with halos of fireworks, Beautiful alabaster princesses and a Texo compass to the Ultracircus, but you're no scientist!"
