# Chapter 31

## In which the crew learns the Sea

Able stood at the bow of the silt-glider with the first mate, a Krunmyn named Huck-ta. Pretty much only Huck-ta, Gef, Ka'Rolly and himself could be out on the deck at the moment. He and Gef and Ka'Rolly due to the fact that they were (mostly) not organic. But, Huck-ta, with his massive stature, thick limbs, taller than Gef, taller maybe than a myconoid, hard rock-like skin, could stand on deck too. Huck-ta *was* organic, thought Able, but he seemed adapted to this place.

Anyone else had to put on big, bulky suits of armor and a breathing apparatus. Some of the crew of the Silt mere had crafted a suit for Rilla but she despised putting it on. So, Able had promised to go out and look and come back and tell her what the sea looked like. Unfortunately, there was nothing to tell. Try as he might, Able could not even tell the difference from the Silt Sea and the sky—there was no horizon, no... anything.

There was just an undulating shift of a cloud of colors all around, from lavender to yellow to red. In fact, he'd never seen so much color in his life, really—maybe with the exception of the Temple of the Trees. He could tell Rilla that.  There were just billowing shadows and sometimes geometric patterns, like being inside a giant kaleidoscope.

There was lightning. It was everywhere, but still hard to see. It would light up the clouds, or a bolt of it would cross the sky out of the corner of your eye.

He looked up to Huck-ta, who was standing like a statue and staring out at the sea. Now and again, Huck-ta would put a box up to his face and then turn, very slowly from left to right, all the way from one side of the ship to the other.

The other problem for the rest of the crew was something that Able couldn't understand. They would lean and grab on to things as if their legs were made of jelly. Rilla explained to Able that it was like not knowing which way was up. Gef had told Able that the two of them could use gyroscopy to stand—whatever that was—and so didn't need to use their surroundings. The others were being pulled down while the floor moved underneath. It was the waves, pushing the glider up and then down, and the floor of the glider to move.

Able had also learned from Wacamolo that a silt-glider had a bow, where he was, at the front of the ship. Then the was the rear of the ship, the stern. And then there was port and starboard, which from where he was standing were his left and right. He began imitating Huck-ta, turning as far as he could port side, and then slowly, slowly, turning all the way to the starboard side.  It took nearly thirty ticks for them to complete a full sweep. Even when he did that, the world around him was a blur.

He realized that Huck-ta must be using the device to change what he was seeing in all the fuzz and color in front of them. He squinted this way and that, changing his extravision to look for movement or heat. When he looked for movement, the world did appear to divide into two parts—he could make out the sky separate from the sea but even then, it was just two different kinds of movement.

He looked up at Huck-ta again. "What are you looking for?"

Like sometimes happened with older beings, Huck-ta completely ignored him. Able understood that the Krunmyn had a job to do and probably shouldn't be disturbed while he carried out his duties. Still though, it would be nice to know just—

"Duuur'laaa," said Huck-ta, in a voice that was like rocks being ground together.

Able was shocked. It was the first time he had heard the Krunmyn speak. It sounded like wind coming out of a cave. "Oh," he said. He did another sweep of the horizon along with the first mate. "And what are Dur'la?"

Huck-ta finished his sweep of the horizon and then brought the device he was peering through down to his side and turned right and down to look at Able. "Iiislaaands." Huck-ta looked again to the horizon. "And rogues."

"Pirates?" Able asked.

Long moments went by again. But this time Able didn't think Huck-ta was ignoring him, just rather, thinking. Sure enough, after Able waited long enough, Huck-ta spoke again, "Waaaaves."

* * *

"Regardless of where that... contraption is pointing, we cannot directly follow its line. We can curve—follow along the line from the Texo Compass—but not along it."

Captain Ona Soireé, Gef, Nicolle, Xistra and Wacamolo were standing in the navigation room of the Craft Siltmere. Rather than maps and charts, as the Captain was used to, Po was occupying the center of the navigation table and drew a new three dimensional map of the area surrounding them as well as the line which the Texo Compass had traced the night before, just after the ship had set out. The line of the Texo Compass passed through the Eye of Sa-ah.

Nicolle spoke, "Forgive us, Captain Ona. We don't even know what this Eye of Sa-ah is. Please explain."

"The Eye of Sa-ah! How can you not know?" But the Captain put her head in her hands and took a moment to breathe. These outsiders of the Sea seemed to know so much more than her, and yet nothing at all. She sighed and spoke, "The Eye... it is a storm that hovers over the Silt Sea. Once in its grasp, there is no escaping it."

"Yes, souer, we—I know of the storm," spoke Xistra.

"Do you, souer? Do you? I have seen it and there is no trade you could offer to get me near it." Ona thought and then spoke, "I had no idea who you people were, even with Alharih's letter describing your amazing quodecraft. Even with the respect I have, no one goes near the Eye of Sa-ah. The currents of the Silt Sea are made of her. We glide around her. It's the great drain."

Nicolle looked to Wacamolo, "What's that?"

Wacamolo spoke, "Po, what is the great drain?"

Po reacted by throwing up a hundred diagrams in languages no one around the table understood. Angles and calculus were precisely drawn, vectors pointed everywhere across the map, everyone around the table was lost. Wacamolo shrugged, "I think Po is lost."

Nicolle demanded, "What about Remory? I thought you had memorized Remory's Guide?"

Wacamolo was defensive, "I have—as much as this old nomex can. It's as new as Delphine's Scar. It's new!" Wacamolo's shoulders fell. "You've been so protected by Vivian, Nicolle, don't you see this is the Shattered Land? The world is falling apart. Who knows why the chimexapods attacked the Steppes? This is the Archelux now."

Nicolle put her hand on the old nomex's shoulder. She spoke to the old nomex and said, "I didn't say it was your fault, and I'm not mad that you don't know. I'm frustrated. We all are. Any answers you can get out of Po are worth our time. Still," she turned to the group, "Where are we to go?"

The Captain, still stern, looked at Nicolle and said, "Kinder quodecraft than me, Princess."

Nicolle's eyes grew sharp like the crashing, cutting waves of the lavender silt, and she said, "I go where my scientist, Vivian the Terrible, requested. Call me princess again and regret it."

Wacamolo and Gef exchanged glances. Neither had seen Nicolle so fierce.

The captain raised her hands in apology.

Nicolle said, "I'm sorry." She brushed her hand across her forehead. "It's been days inside and... and this constant motion... I need to lie down. I feel like I can do little else."

"No apologies necessary," said Captain Ona. "This is what the Sea does to you." She looked around the navigation room at everyone. "There is nowhere to look, no horizon. It feels like you're sitting still in a room with no end. The cloud of silt even ruins the stars. And we want it that way. If we can see the sky, we have lost the wind and if we lose the wind we will be trapped."

Everyone in the room was silent in agreement.

"We should make a straight line North as fast as possible," said the Captain. "We cannot follow your friend's line. Once to the other shore, you can disembark and intersect with your goal."

A very strange sound begin emanating from outside the navigation room. It was perhaps a voice, a call. A low pitched sound that rose above the wind and silt and rose and rose in pitch, a sound like "haaarrruuuuuuu!" The captain immediately perked up. "Siltsuits!" she shouted. "Masks!"

Crew began milling about the room and the captain moved over to a piece of instrumentation at the bow of the navigation room, a periscope. She pulled handles down from a column that went up into the ceiling, pressed her face into a large viewing box and turned her hole body from right to left, scanning. All the while, the call kept getting closer. "Haaarrruuuuu!"

Gef approached, "Captain, that noise?"

The captain looked to Gef from the scope, "That's Huck-tu. He sounding the alarm." The Captain spoke again, this time, loudly to everyone, "We must—" but and then entire glider lifted into the air, and they all fell over and slid to the back of the circular chamber.

* * *

Huck-ta turned from his vigil, put away his instrument, lifted both hands to his face in a cone and after a long intake of air, shouted, "Haaarrruuuuuu!" Able took a step back. The call was so loud! Before Able could move again, Huck-ta had swept him up, grabbing him with one massive hand and began running down the deck of the glider toward the conning tower, continuing to make the call.

Able struggled a bit in Huck-ta's grip, but he was mostly trying to turn his head to see what Huck-ta had seen. He adjusted his vision and saw that the sky had definitely changed. It had not just changed, it had shrunk! He could see that the horizon was growing, getting taller than the bow of the ship someone how.

As Huck-ta ran along the deck, he was taking larger and larger steps, bounding. His bounds become longer and as he landed on the deck, he was sliding too. The ship was turning upwards toward the horizon, which was growing taller at an alarming rate. As they neared the conning tower of the glider, Huck-ta took one more massive stride that turned into a plummet as the horizon of the sea reached up past the glider's sails. Huck-ta, with Able in hand, fell to the main door of the conning tower, coming to stand on the tower itself. He turned the massive wheel that held the door to the tower shut, flung the door open and jumped inside just as Able could see the bow of the ship disappearing into the Sea itself.

