# Chapter 32

## In which the crew saves the Craft Siltmere

The Craft Siltmere had struck a rogue wave. Captain Ona Soireé could tell from the angle of their ascent that they had about fifteen ern to do anything required before the silt-glider went over the top of the wave and then there would be freefall as they cascaded down the other side. As she donned her siltsuit—one of the only people in the navigation room even able to stand upright and navigate the room—she was shouting orders to her crew. "Get yourself ties to the high knobs! We're going to freefall!"

Xistra, Nicolle and Wacamolo had all fallen and fallen to the back of the navigation room, Xistra landing on her feet. The captain had remarked before that a lot of Dustmyn had natural silt legs. She began to scurry to help Nicolle to her feet, who, exhausted, had crumpled into a pile on the wall. "I've got you, sister," she said as she began helping the weakened Nicolle put on her breathing mask and checked her suit's latches.

Gef was shouting from above them, clinging to the maps table. "Xistra! Nicolle! Help Waca and go below! Make sure Arthra and Rilla are okay!" Gef swung himself to the "top" of the maps table and looked further up the room to the Captain. The Captain shouted down to him, "There's no time for that! The storage room is stabilized anyway. Get everyone tied to that wall!"

Gef looked around and to his surprise, Ka' Rolly was right next to him. Gef smiled a quick smile and then said, "You heard the captain, let's get everyone tied in!" He and Ka'Rolly jumped from the table on either side and slid all the way to the back of the navigation room. Once there, they began grabbing ties wound around cylinders on the round wall of the navigation room and attaching the to the silt suits of the others.

Gef looked to Wacamolo, Nicolle and Xistra, who were laying against the back wall of the  navigation room, stuck to it. Wacamolo shouted, his voice muffled by both his breathing mask and the massive roar outside the room. "Where's Po?" He looked around the room and saw a small satellite near the maps table, made up of Nip cradling Po and hovering. Then, the crew found themselves sliding to the bottom of the wall and the floor of the room coming back underneath them.

Nicolle was still sitting, hunched over in a pile at the corner of the wall and floor. Gef repelled over to her, checked her tie and said, "Hey! Hey! You in there?" Nicolle could do little more than hold her hand up and give him an okay sign. He put his arm around her arm and grabbed on to her tie. The floor ceased to be the floor again, now tilting in the opposite direction. The winches of the ties began to whir and tighten as everyone lifted off of the floor and began just floating in the air, unable to maneuver themselves much.

The wave had been massive, steep and fast; so much so, it had hurled the silt-glider into the air, only to let it fly for moments before it connected again, the wave dropping the glider like a toy. Although out looked like everyone was floating, it was just that the glider was falling faster than they were. They were all falling inside the ship, which was falling. Despite the cracking sound of the wind and torrent outside, it seemed calm inside the navigation room.

* * *

Inside the antechamber of the conning tower of the glider, Huck-ta had pulled a tie from the wall and wrapped around Able and then done the same for himself. They were both floating in the small room, and Able said, "You sure can move when you want to."

Huck-ta nodded.

Able looked around the room, lit up by gloworm orbs. "This is fun!"

Huck-ta tucked himself into a ball, floated upside down facing Able, closed his eyes and sighed.

* * *

There was a massive jolt as the ship again made contact with the wave, slid to the bottom and then promptly righted itself. Everything and everyone in the navigation room came back down to the floor, only some landing on their feat. For the others, the ties had kept them close enough to the floor that fall was not bad. Gef let himself fall next to Nicolle and as they began to be able to sit upright on the floor, Nicolle pulled her mask off and gasped. "I don't know which is worse..." She gulped a deep breath again, "the silt sickness or the freefall."

"Your determination is impressive, but maybe now you want to stay with Rilla and Arthra in the stabilized cargo bay?"

Nicolle gulped and nodded, "Yes, please."

They both laughed and Gef waved over to Ka'Rolly. "Can you get her down to the cargo bay?" Ka'Rolly saluted and lifted Nicolle up gently and carried her out of the navigation room.

Wacamolo wobbled over to Gef, his hand on his head. "If you'll not be needing me, I think I will join them."

Gef put his hand on Wacamolo's shoulder. "That'll be just fine."

Po and Nip, in their satellite configuration, floated over to Wacamolo who spoke, "I'll be find you two. Stay here." They all beeped with contentment.

One of the doors to the navigation room opened and Able, followed by Huck-ta entered the room. "That was fun!" said Able. Then, his expression changed as he saw Ka'Rolly carrying Nicolle, and Wacamolo behind them, sagging. "Is everyone all right?"

The captain approached both. "Everyone is going to be all right, Able." The captain clapped Huck-ta hard on the shoulder, "Thanks once again, number one." Huck-ta nodded. She turned to Gef, "Now we have a new problem. Let's all go out on the deck and try to figure out where the hell we are heading."

Able looked up at Gef, "I want to check on Rilla."

"Be quick about it. Then get back to the deck and bring Ka'Rolly with you. I have a feeling we're going to need to check the Texo Compass after that wave."

* * *

[The Cargo Bay]