# Chapter 32

## In which the crew saves the Craft Siltmere

The Craft Siltmere had struck a rogue wave. Captain Ona Soireé could tell from the angle of their ascent that they had about fifteen ern to do anything required before the silt-glider went over the top of the wave and then there would be freefall as they cascaded down the other side. As she donned her siltsuit—one of the only people in the navigation room even able to stand upright and navigate the room—she was shouting orders to her crew. "Get yourself ties to the high knobs! We're going to freefall!"

Gef was shouting too, "Able! Get Rilla a breathing mask and take her down below with Arthra; make sure she's okay. Ka'rolly! Go with them!" Able, with the help of Ka'Rolly quickly gathered Rilla and rolled and pushed down to the ladder that went to the base of the glider. It was odd to climb "down" the ladder because it felt more like climbing along the ladder.

Gef looked to Wacamolo, Nicolle and Xistra, who were laying against the back wall of the  navigation room, stuck to it. He had clung to a handle on the navigation table when the ship turned and now appeared to be ten meters above them. The ship's walls were covered in knobs and handles and ropes. Right side up they looked out of place and were in locations, like the ceiling, that made no sense. They made sense now. Gef collected breathing masks from mounts on the naviagation table dropped down to the back wall landing near the rest of the crew.

 and handed them off to the rest of the crew. As they dawned the masks, he said, "I think we all need to get further below and find suits. The captain can take care of the reeee...st" And he was wrong.

The captain had been wrong. The wave had been massive, steep and fast; so much so, it had hurled the silt-glider into the air, only to let it fly for moments before it connected again, the wave dropping the glider like a toy.

Everyone in the navigation room began to float. Despite the wracking sound of the wind and torrent outside, it seemed calm inside the navigation room.

"What is happening please?" Shouted Wacamolo.

"We are in the air, Wacamolo, because the ship is heading straight down!" Shouted Nicolle.

"Oh dear!" Shouted Wacamolo.

Gef got the group rot



