# Chapter 33

## Skimming the Eye

Captain Ona still could not believe her eyes. The crew had constructed some kind of metallic netting and installed it inside the gemaker sail. Able and his gizmos formed the texo compass and the thick blue beam blasted into the sail and after a few long minutes of what Xistra called "ionizing build-up" the ship began to move on its own! At first it crept forward, but then it began to pick up speed. As it achieved a smooth glide over the now calm Silt Sea, the crew spontaneously let out howls of laughter and cheers.

What's more, by putting the laser to one side of the remake sail, the—another Xistra term—pressure differentiation turned the ship. It could be steered as easily as a beetle! Ona felt as if she could feel the heart of the Craft Siltmere jumping for joy at being able to move so lithely. When everything seemed in order (they had tested the steering, checked the sail for damage) Gef and Xistra and Captain Ona gathered on the bow of the glider with Huck-ta to discuss navigation plans.

Captain Ona crossed her arms and said, "I cannot believe that I am saying this, but with this kind of"—she looked cautiously over her shoulder—"power... we could skim the eye of Sarah and thrust ourselves on its northward cyclic winds and take you straight to your original destination on the North Shore." She shrugged in disbelief. "We could do it in a matter of days at this rate." She shook her head.

Xistra put her hand on the Captain's shoulder. "I'm the last person to join this crew. Believe me, [friend], I know what you're feeling."

"So, do you think it's really out there?—the Ultracircus?"

"I do," said Gef. "Frankly, more than ever."

"And yet, you do not acknowledge that you are a caretaker."

Gef just looked down at the deck. "Maybe I was once, I don't know. But something in me tells me that there is a reason I'm not anymore."

"What do you plan to do with the Ultracircus should you find it?"

Gef looked up again, "Get some answers."

"Such as?"

Gef shrugged, "What's wrong with the world? Can it be repaired?"

The captain nodded thoughtfully. "Those are heavy, heavy worries."

The group stood in silence and reflected as the still glider skimmed the vast sea of silicon dust.

* * *

With her siltsuit on—which she hated—Rilla climbed eh ladder to the deck on the conning tower wear Able, Nip, Po and Ka'Rolly were all holding vigil, firing the texo compass into the gemaker sail. The light from the laser was so bright, but  it didn't strain her eyes to look at it like it might if she stared at one of Wacamolo's spark logicanths—one she had begged him to show her how to do, and he steadily refused. The light also, very strangely, made no noise, no crackling like a fire might. It was there even thought it looked like it wasn't there.

"Hello?"

Able looked down from Ka'Rolly's shoulders, "Hi, Rilla! You came out!"

"Xistra said it would be okay since the air is so calm. But she also told me not to make you lose your concentration and stop the compass."

"I don't think... it's not so hard now. I can just do it now."

"'Kay." Rilla looked at the deck and her feet, not sure what help to offer. "You need anything?"

Able thought and then shrugged. "I don't guess so."

"'Kay."

There was a long pause. Then, Able had an idea. "You want to see it from up here?"

Rilla looked puzzled.

Able looked down at Ka'Rolly, "Ka'Rolly, can you bring Rilla up here, too?"

Ka'rolly took one hand off Able and leaned. Seeing what was about to happen, Rilla lifted her arms up and took hold of Ka'Rolly's hands. It lifted her up to its right shoulder, where Able stepped over to one side and held out his right hand, Po in his left. She took hold of Able's hand and stood on Ka'Rolly's right shoulder.

Up above the rails, the wind was no racing through her braids. She could feel it on her face. It was like they were flying. "Wooooo!" She shouted, looking at Able. Able smiled brightly.
She looked to the bow of the Craft Siltmere as it skimmed the vastness of the Silt Sea. Far off in the distance to the portside of the horizon, she could see a mass of swilring clouds—The Eye of Sa'ah.

Being inside Nip's swooshing rings was incredible. It seemed to be everywhere at once, not so much orbiting Able and Rilla as much as appearing and disappearing everywhere all at once. She looked down at Ka'Rolly's head between their knees, at least Rolly looked to be content, staring ahead from inside Ka.

"This is *amazing*, Able!"

Able laughed, and then, his extravision caught something—a movement towards where the Eye was. Rilla saw that Able was focused. "What's up?"

"I know this is fun, but can you go tell Huck-ta to look toward the Eye and see what he sees?"

"Okay," said Rilla, disappointed, but duty-bound. "Let me down, Ka'Rolly."

Ka'Rolly obliged. "See you later, Able!" And with that, Rilla climbed down the ladder and was gone. Able stared at the spot she had been last.

* * *

Once again, Huck-ta, Captain Ona, Gef, Xistra and now Rilla, too, stood at the bow of the silt glider, all staring off into the distance at what looked to be a city in the Silt Sea, somewhere between them and the Eye of Sa'ah.

Captain Ona collapsed her telescope and whispered, "I thought I'd seen it all today."

"What are we looking at, Captain?" Asked Gef.

"It can't be."

Huck-ta spoke, "Sultana-nur-waya."

The captain looked at him, puzzled. "You say that as if you have seen it before."

Huck-ta turned slowly to the captain and then shrugged.

"Huh."

"Did that mean yes?" Asked Xistra.

"I'll take it that way," said Captain Ona.

"So, we change course? Avoid it?" Asked Gef.

"Every bone in my body wants to see it for myself," said the Captain. "But I also am bound by oath to get you where you need to be, and that is not Sultana-nur-waya." She sighed. "It's right in the way of our path to skim the Eye—can that be a coincidence?"

"Why would it be anything else?" Asked Gef.

"Call it a hunch. All these years of sailing, never seeing it, we turn that on," the captain point to Able and his creations, "and there she looms."

"Have you ever been this close to the Eye?"

"Oh," the Captain looked at Gef with an expression of weariness, "much closer."

"Well, if we head due north, we still have our own propulsion. We won't land that far from where the compass is pointing. I vote for avoiding it."

"With respect, al Gef, there are no votes here."

Gef put his hands up, "My apologies. That's my council."

The captain smiled. "You're all right. In this instance, I happen to agree with you. We'll avoid her. But, take my soul, I wish I could see the streets of that mysterious place."

The captain prepared the crew for major maneuvers, and then climbed the tower to take a place next to Able. Gef joined as well.

"Hi, Captain," said Able.

The captain looked up at the small wonder and shook her head.

"Able, we need to to do everything the Captain says to steer the Siltmere, okay?"

"You go it," said Able, glad to be in a position of control.

Gef explained to Able what degrees were and checked that he remembered what port and starboard were. With that, the captain began with asking Able to veer slightly starboard just five degrees. For about an hour the ship gliding effortlessly, the Eye of Sa'ah beginning to move ever so lightly left in the sky. But, to her consternation, Sultana-nur-waya also changed course, also moving away from the Eye.

"I don't like this," she said to no one.

The next few hours were an attempt to steer harder starboard to avoid intersecting with Sultana-nur-waya's path. But again, the city corrected as well, even seemed to speed up. The captain decided to switch tactics and head portside and try to get between the city and the Eye. Again, the city corrected as well, beginning to loom on the horizon like a mountain in the middle distance. Little else that they did seemed to allow them to avoid heading straight for the city, almost as if it was pulling them in.

Within another hour, Able and Gef and the Captain could see that the rocky shores of the dur'la were covered my a fog of silt dust. Up from those clouds, there was a fortress wall that surrounded three distinct towers, each a different height, the central one being the tallest. They each had an appearance of being grown and not built, not unlike the chimexopods' hive.

"I don't say this often, Gef. But I've no idea what to do but to turn around completely, and stain my honor for good."

"No. If I've learned anything on this little adventure, it's to pay attention to what's in front of us, and Sultana-nur-waya has put itself in front of us."

Gradually, the silt glider approached the dur'la. As they got within kilometers of it, the Captain suggested to Able that he stop transmitting. "Seems to me, they're coming to us anyway."

Sure enough, with no wind in the sails anymore, the massive island approached them. The tower no looming over them, one even casting them in shadow. Everyone on the glider marveled, staring out and up at this massive object that dwarfed the glider. The towers were easily as tall as Vivian's tower at Boisenval. There was nothing to do but wait.

"By the dust, that is even more than I imaged," the Captain whispered. From the bow, Huck-ta pointed, and shouted up to the Captain, "Dooocks!"

The Captain scurried down the conning tower ladder with Gef and Able in close pursuit. The captain walked past stunned crew members, shouting, "Masks! Masks!" They were coming very close to the churning dust a the base of Sultana-nur-waya. As the Captain arrived at Huck-ta's side, she asked, "What have you seen?" Huck-ta handed here the dust screener box he always carried and pointed into the clouds. The captain stared and then laughed.

She turned to Gef. "There's a pier. And there's someone on it."

Using his extravision, Gef stared into the clouds and could make out the pier and the figure, but there was something even more troubling that that. The figure was not organic. "Oh, this just keeps getting better."

The glider slowly drifted into the churning silt. The pier was more like a boom, strung up to tower gates at the base of the island. It swung out to meet the ship's port side. At the Captain's impatient orders, the crew began tying the silt glider to the boom, and the captain, Huck-ta, Gef, and Able met at the gangplank, which had to be raised up to meet the boom.

A figure strode down the gangplank and jumped down to the deck of the ship. Even in the dust, Gef could see.

The figure spoke, "Well, hello there, brother."