# Chapter 34

## Aboard the Living Island

Tet and his entourage led the crew into the bowels of Sultana Nur Waya, a massive castle that sat on the back of the giant silt sea turtle, Shume. Tet explained to his guests that the turtle was not even the largest among those that swam in the Silt Sea, but that for whatever reason, the ancient people who built the fortress convinced Shume to stay swimming on the surface. Most turtles dove below the surface of the sea and did not come up again for hundreds of years at a time. Shume was more accommodating, though no one knew why.

The fortress’s ceilings and archways were as tall as the Museum of Trees back near the City of Horn. The fortress might vey well even be larger than the City of Horn. With no surroundings but the flat Silt Sea, it was difficult to gauge. The walls were like alabaster, bows of pink and lavender bending along them as the group walked along. They were lit by some unseen source coming from high overhead. The archways and columns were covered in a rich green moss surrounded by small flying orbs of light. Able could feel that the entire place had moisture in the air. The moss dripped with dew that would gather into intricately carved etchings in the walls, and as the dew thickened and traveled down the etchings it would pool in massive urns set at the bottoms archways.

The group would pass through intersections of hallways where the ceilings of Sultana Nur Waya were so high they vanished in a haze. Able could even see creatures flying from wall to wall or in lazy circles high above. Various creatures clung to the walls and as the group would enter, brightening the area with their lights, the creatures would disappear into holes. Upon close inspection, the walls themselves seemed to be alive. Nicolle looked closely with one of her scopes and could see that the composition of the walls was less like mineral and more like a seashell.

Jogging to catch up to the group, she pointed this out to Gef. Gef whispered, “Maybe Sultana Nur Waya is part of Shume’s shell.”

Tet turned and spoke, “I have before surmised the same thing, Gef—that perhaps the fortress is part of Shume. However, I have come to believe that the fortress is a second creature that is in a symbiotic relationship with Shume.” Gef and Nicolle both noted Tet’s excellent hearing—something that might be useful to know down the road.

Able also watched Tet’s “guards.” They all wore the same embroidered cloak that Tet was wearing. The cloaks were a dark plum color with golden winding patterns of tendrils that looked like energy and centered on a symbol in the middle of their backs. The symbol was an equilateral triangle that pointed downward, resting on three semi-circles. Able noticed though that where Tet had removed his hood and pulled the cloak back from his shoulders, his people remained shrouded, their eyes glowing bright magenta. They had a very unusual gait, almost heaving with each step. They also each made a unique and unusual subsonic sound that only Able and Gef could perceive. At one point during the tour, Gef and Able exchanged glances. Able’s look was one of nervousness about their company and Gef nodded in reply.

With his hood off and his cloak off his shoulders, all of the crew could not stop staring at Tet. The best way that Able could think to describe him was that Tet looked like a newer version of Gef. Other than Gef’s scratches and blemishes and wear, the two were identical. Tet was waxing on and on about the keep. He had surmised that it was built by the Krunmyn people, possibly five hundred years earlier, but they had abandoned it for thus far unexplained reasons. The texts that were available were written in an ancient form of the Krunmyn language—frankly, the Krunmyn barely wrote anymore anyway. Tet had been working on translating them as part of his many studies.

“Po can help with that,” Able offered. Gef winced. He wasn’t at all sure what they should be telling this synthezoid. He might look like Gef, but Gef was not at all convinced of trust because of only that fact.

“Pardon?” Tet asked.

“I said Po can help with that. He can read anything.”

“Tet looked around the group. And who is Po?”

Able pulled Po out of a pouch and held him aloft. Po made a series of chirps.

“Po, you say? May I examine Po?”

Able pulled Po a little closer and replied, “You’d better not. He also likes to eat memories.”

“He does what now?”

Nicolle spoke, “We’re not sure how exactly, but he can absorb nearly any kind of information and that includes an individual’s memories.”

Tet stepped back. “Well, that certainly adds to my list of questions for all of you.”

Just then, Nip left Xistra’s neck and spun in a halo around Tet’s head, making a blat sound.

“Oh my,” said Tet.

“That’s Nip,” said Able.

Tet watched the Nip spin and put his hand to his chin. “So many questions.”

The tour group had arrived at a massive octagonal room with no ceiling. The walls stretched up through the center of the keep and through the hole in the roof, the Skybow of the Goliaths could be seen, though just a thin line in a gray sky this near the equator.

“Yes,” said Wacamolo, “I have a question for you, Mr. Tet.”

Tet looked down at the old Nomex, waiting.

“If you say that you are Gef’s brother, I should wonder how many scientists you have known.”

Tet smiled wide. “Brother Wacamolo, I have known *all of them*.”

Wacamolo looked shocked—several members of the group did.

Tet continued, “So has Gef, though,” Tet squinted at Gef, “he seems to have forgotten that.”

Wacamolo looked at Gef with consternation and then nodded.

“I think,” said Tet, “that we all have questions. And we shall commence to answering them soon. Unfortunately, friends, our tour ends here.”

Tet’s entourage dissolved. Their cloaks fell to the ground. In place of each “person” were pairs of floating octahedrons, connected by many rods and surrounded by glowing clouds of dust. The dust immediately swirled around each member of the crew with the exception of Nip, who immediately screeched and flew up into the heights of the chamber. The dust clouds froze each of the crew in their tracks, lifting them off the ground.

“As I said, I have many, many questions, and I’m sure you do as well, but in the interest of my own safety, this is how we must proceed. Like your Nip and Po, I have the Vim. You have just met them. They will keep you safe while I proceed with my investigation. We will all speak very soon.”

The crew members looked at each other in horror as each shimmered and then disappeared.