# Chapter 34

## Sultana Nur Waya

Able awoke from strange dreams. It was to think of them as dreams, though, some were so real. There were rough sketches of things he had actually seen, like the grey goo of the Automatic Jungle, the giant automen of the Cullen Mountains, or the Delphine Meteor. Then there were scenes of things he didn't think he had seen. There was a massive vortex of some kind, floating up inside a very large cavern. There was a mountain that had been turned upside down.

Able blinked and looked at his surroundings. He was high up on a pedestal and one of the first things he saw was himself, across the room, lying on a table. He could see his whole body  on a table with machinery around him, lights and switches and... there was a massive hole in his chest!

When he had seen himself before, in reflections, he had been covered in a vibrating light and his eyes lit up. From here, wherever here was, his body not only had a massive hole in the abdomen, but his eyes were gray—his whole body gray. He looked dead.

But then his vision came around to someone in front him. This person was working on something near him at first, but then looked up and said, "Ah! It looks like you're back with us." As the face came into view, it was Gef! "Gef!" said Able. Only he didn't. This was not Gef and when he went to speak but nothing came out anyway. "Just a moment," Not-Gef replied. There was more work and then, "Try to speak again."

"Try what again?" This time Able could hear himself on the inside *and* on the outside. This made sense. "Gef?" Able asked again. The person working on him stood up to his full height and was still looking up at Able, "Not Gef. Cal."

"Cal?" Able began to see the whole room take shape now. Beginning with his body on the table, surrounded by machines—like the ones he had built for his mother. He realized he hadn't thought about that in a long time. Then, he surveyed the room to see lots and lots of these machines, some that towered over him and hid their tops in the high dark ceilings of the room. It looked like Ghendra's place, a laboratory. The whole room was filled with bits and bobs and things that looked incomplete.

"Are you still with me?" asked Cal.

Able focused again on this Cal-who-was-not-Gef. "Where are my friends?"

Cal smiled. "They are quite nearby and very much enjoying themselves. I can show you if you like, but I need you to do something for me."

"Okay."

"I want you to take a step towards me."

Able tried to contemplate this. He was above this Cal, looking down. "I'll fall."

"No, no. You won't. Maybe it would help you first if you looked down—at your feet."

Able looked down, the height still unusual, but sure enough, his head looked down his torso, his waist, his legs and far beneath him, his feet! Able blinked several times. He was so high up, but there he was. He held out his hands in front of him, and there they were, but they were huge. He made fists and then let go. He looked down at his feet again and moved his feet. They moved but they seemed so, so far away. Still though, he took a step. He felt wobbly, his head like a balloon.

Cal held up his hands, "Okay, just finish with the other foot and then stand. See how that feels."

Without knowing quite why he did it, Able squatted down, so he was at the height he was use to, his head at Cal's stomach. Able looked up at Cal and squinted. Cal looked just like Gef, except for the way he moved. Cal was more deliberate, less like water than Gef. Able stood again and felt the world around him move swiftly down, and even Cal, who was the same height as Gef, came to be beneath him. Able looked at Cal, "I don't understand."

* * *

Cal pulled a chair over to where Gef sat in restraints and sat down facing him.

Gef didn't wait for Cal to say anything and asked, "Who are you?"

Cal leaned over with his elbows on his knees, "Dear brother, what did you do to yourself?"

Gef looked confused. "I don't have a brother. I'm the last of the synthezoids."

Cal looked hurt, sat up and gestured to himself, "Clearly not."

"Where did you come from?"

Cal laughed. "I've been here the whole time!—looking for you, I might add."

They sat and stared at each other for a while. Then, Cal reached out and put his hand on Gef's head. "How did you do it? How did you erase your memories?"

Gef shook his head to get the uninvited touch off. "I don't know what you're talking about."

"So, you just woke up one day with no idea what you'd done?—who you were?"

Gef looked at the floor. "Someone... found me."

"Which one was it? That old nomex creature? One of the women? One of the children? One of those... things? Who found you?"

"Wacamolo is his name." Gef looked at Cal in the eyes. It was like looking in a distorted mirror.

"And where'd you find this... child version of us?"

"Able. He found me."

"Do you know where it came from? Who made it? Why would someone make a child version of us?"

"What do you mean child version?"

"It's a synthezoid—a daemon—like us! By the Ungods, how could you do this to yourself? It's a synthezoid. It's a synthezoid child. Who would craft such a thing? Why?"

"I don't know. He told me his parents were nomex. They lived in the desert of Idex Cortez. He said his mother's name was Evo."

"Evo!" Cal jumped up out of his chair and pointed in Gef's face. "You found where Evo was? And you didn't get her? You idiot! You were so close!" Cal put his hands to his face. "Where is she now?"

"I think she's dead."

"What? What! One of the greatest living scientists and she just is dead? Why? How?" Cal began to pace. "She could have helped us repair the breach. She could have helped us fix everything. Why let herself perish? This makes no sense."

Gef looked at the floor again. "I don't understand."

"Of course you don't, you sentimental old fool. You destroyed your own mind rather than stick to the plan. And now we've lost Evo, too." Cal sat down again. "This Able... what does it know."

"He."

Cal scoffed. "Oh please."

"He doesn't know anything. But..."

Cal leaned in. "But what?"

Then, Gef decided that he had given enough information to this doppelgänger. "But nothing. Let us go."

"Go where?"

"We were on our way to find the Ultracircus. Let us go. There are answers there."

Cal shook his head. "No one can find the Ultracircus. I've searched for it for decades."

Gef smiled. "We know how to find it."

* * *

Able continued to stare at his massive hands, then looked at his body lying on a table, his chest cracked open. He looked to Cal, "I don't understand."

"I've put you in a proper body." Cal pointed at Able's body lying on the table. "That is no longer your body." Cal waved at Able, "Come. Have a look."

Able stomped over to where Cal was standing. There was a mirrored column. As Able approached it, he could see himself moving, but it wasn't him. Except that it was him. When he moved, the reflection moved. He could see the aura of himself, see the light in his eyes. He looked at his hands. He looked back at the mirrored column. He leaned in and looked into his own eyes. He reached up and touched his own forehead. He looked at Cal, "I have a new body?"

Cal crossed his arms. "Indeed. In fact, I would dare say you have a better one than me or my brother Gef. I've made some improvements."

Turning away from the mirrored column, Able stomped over to the table where he lay. He looked at himself, lying on the table. "I didn't mind my old body," he said.

"I understand, Able." Cal put his hand on Able's shoulder, reaching up to do so. "But don't be nostalgic. Nostalgia is a poison. This body will suit you much better."

"Can I see my friends now?"

Cal looked annoyed. "I know you all were looking for the Ultracircus, but you don't need to do that now. I have all the answers you need. You need to come with me and we are going to fix something—an invention created by my master."

Able looked down. "Okay. But, can I see my friends?”

"I really think you should spend some time here getting used to your new body."

