# Chapter 34

## A New Able

Able awoke from strange dreams. They were rough sketches of things he had actually seen, like the grey goo of the Automatic Jungle, the giant automen of the Cullen Mountains, or the Delphine Meteor. However, these real memories were interwoven with scenes of things he didn't think he had seen. There was a massive vortex of some kind, floating up inside a very large cavern. There was a mountain that had been turned upside down. And everything in the world seemed to point or look toward this mountain, this place he was certain he had never seen.

Able blinked and looked around his surroundings. He was standing high up on a pedestal and one of the first things he saw was himself, across the room, lying on a table. He could see his whole body surrounded by machinery, like his mother had been back home. There were lights and switches and... there was a massive hole in the chest of his body!

When he had seen himself before, in reflections, he had been covered in a vibrating energy field and his eyes had a bright, cyan light. From here, wherever here was, his body not only had a massive hole in the abdomen, but his eyes were gray—his whole body gray. He looked dead to himself.

His vision came around to someone in front of him. This person was working on something near him at first, but then looked up and said, "Ah! It looks like you're back with us." As the face came into view, it was Gef! Able tried to say, “Gef!" but nothing came out. After a moment, watching this figure move about, Able realized that this could not be Gef, though they were identical. "Just a moment," Not-Gef said. There was more work and then, "Try to speak again."

"Try what again?" This time Able could hear himself on the inside *and* on the outside. He was relieved. "Gef?" Able asked again. The person working on him stood up to his full height, but still looking up at Able, "Not Gef. Tet."

"Tet.” Able began to see the whole room take shape now. Beginning with his body on the table, surrounded by machines, he then surveyed the room to see lots and lots of other machines. Some towered over him and hid their tops in the high dark ceilings of the room. It looked like Ghendra's place, a laboratory. The whole room was filled with bits and bobs, unrecognizable things that still somehow looked incomplete.

"Are you still with me?" asked Tet.

Able focused again on this Tet. "Where are my friends?"

Tet smiled. "They are quite nearby and very much enjoying themselves. I can show you if you like, but I need you to do something for me."

"Okay."

"I want you to take a step towards me."

Able tried to contemplate this. He was above this Tet, looking down. "I'll fall."

"No, no. You won't. Maybe it would help you first if you looked down at your feet."

Able looked down, the height still unusual, but sure enough, he looked down and he could see his torso, his waist, his legs and far beneath him, his feet! Able blinked several times. He was so high up, but there he was. He held out his hands in front of him, and there they were, but huge. He flexed fists and then released. He looked down again and moved his feet, stepping up without stepping forward. They moved but they seemed so far away. Still though, he took a step. He felt wobbly, disoriented, his head like a balloon.

Tet held up his hands, "Okay, just finish with the other foot and then stand. See how that feels."

Without knowing quite why he did it, Able squatted down, so he was at the height he was used to, his head at Tet's stomach. Able looked up at Tet and squinted. This new synthezoid looked just like Gef, except for how clean he was and the way he moved. Tet was more deliberate, less like water than Gef. Able stood again and felt the world around him move swiftly down, and even Tet, who was the same height as Gef, came to be beneath him. Able looked at Tet, "I don't understand what’s happening.”

* * *

Tet pulled a chair over to where Gef sat in restraints and sat down facing him.

Gef didn't wait for Tet to say anything and asked, "Who are you?"

Tet leaned over with his elbows on his knees, looking fascinated, "Dear brother, what did you do to yourself?"

Gef looked confused. "I don't have a brother. I'm the last of the synthezoids."

Tet looked hurt, sat up and gestured to himself, "Clearly not."

"Where did you come from?"

Tet laughed. "I've been here the whole time!—looking for you, I might add."

They sat and stared at each other for a while. Then, Tet reached out and put his hand on Gef's head. "How did you do it? How did you erase your mind?”

Gef shook his head to get the uninvited touch off. "I don't know what you're talking about."

"So, you just woke up one day with no idea what you'd done?—who you were?"

Gef looked at the floor. "Someone... found me. I had been... off... for a long time.” Gef didn’t know why he was telling this to Tet, except that there was some strange reassurance in speaking to this copy—this newer copy of himself.

“Off. Disgusting. Which one was it that found you? That old nomex creature? One of the women? One of the children? One of those... things? Who found you?"

"Wacamolo is his name." Gef looked at Tet in the eyes. It was like looking into a distorted mirror.

"And where'd you find this... child version of us?"

"Able. He found me."

"Do you know where it came from? Who made it? Why would someone make a child version of us?"

"What do you mean child version?"

“I mean that in the history of the creation of synthezoids, a child has never been created, never needed. It's a synthezoid—a daemon—like us—but a child! By the Ungods, how could you do this to yourself? It's a synthezoid. It's a synthezoid child. Who would craft such a thing? Why?"

"I don't know. He told me his parents were nomex. They lived in the desert of Idex Mortez. He said his mother's name was Evo."

"Evo!" Tet jumped up out of his chair and pointed in Gef's face. "You found where Evo was? And you didn't get her? You idiot! You were so close!" Tet put his hands to his face. "Where is she now?"

"I think she's dead."

"What? What! One of the greatest living scientists and she’s just dead? Why? How?" Tet began to pace. "She could have helped us repair the Breach. She could have helped us fix everything. Why let herself perish? This makes no sense."

Gef looked at the floor again. "I don't understand."

"Of course you don't, you sentimental old fool. You destroyed your own mind rather than stick to the plan. And now we've lost Evo, too." Tet sat down again. "This Able... what does it know?”

"He."

Tet scoffed. "Oh please."

"He doesn't know anything. But..."

Tet leaned in. "But what?"

Then, Gef decided that he had given enough information to this doppelgänger. "But nothing. Let us go."

"Go where?"

"We were on our way to find the Ultracircus. Let us go. There are answers there."

Tet shook his head. "No one can find the Ultracircus. I've searched for it for decades."

Gef smiled. "We know how to find it."

* * *

Able continued to stare at his massive hands, then looked at his body lying on the nearby table, his chest cracked open. He looked to Tet, "I don't understand."

"I've put you in a proper body." Tet pointed at Able's body lying on the table. "That is no longer your body." Tet waved at Able, "Come. Have a look."

Able stomped over to where Tet was standing. There was a mirrored column. As Able approached it, he could see himself moving, but it wasn't him—except that it had to be him. When he moved, the reflection moved. He could see the aura of himself, see the cyan light in his eyes. He looked at his hands. He looked back at the mirrored column. He leaned in and looked into his own eyes. He reached up and touched his own forehead. He looked at Tet, "I have a new body?"

Tet crossed his arms. "Indeed. In fact, I would dare say you have a better one than me or my brother—your friend—Gef. I've made some improvements."

Turning away from the mirrored column, Able stomped over to the table where he lay. He looked at himself, lying on the table. "I didn't mind my old body," he said.

"I understand, Able." Tet put his hand on Able's shoulder, reaching up to do so. "But don't be nostalgic. Nostalgia is a poison. This body will suit you much better for the tasks ahead of us.”

"Can I see my friends now?"

"I really think you should spend some time here getting used to your new body, but I won’t keep you from your friends any longer.”

* * *

Tet released the restraints that had been holding Gef.

“Why the restraints?”

“Brother, I didn’t know what you had done to yourself. I wasn’t sure how you would behave.”

All the restraints undone, Tet looked his brother up and down. “Suffice it to say, you are fairly harmless right now, and I have had many of my questions answered. Let’s go find your friends.”

* * *

Most of the crew, Wacamolo, Nicolle, Xistra, Rilla, Ka’Rolly and Po were held up in a large dining area somewhere in the castle on Sultana Nur Waya. The room was massive, causing their every word to reverb. It had a vaulted stone ceiling that curved down to a massive window on one side of the room. The window curved around in a semi-circle looking down on the back of the neck of the massive turtle that the whole fortress stood upon.

The Silt Sea parted for the neck of the titan turtle, while waves of silt washed up and down its length. Beyond that was a fuzzy horizon of nothing. Unlike the Craft Siltmere, no motion of the sea could be felt. It was as if they were standing on an island, which... they were. It just happened to be a living island. Near the window was a long dining table with nearly twenty chairs. On either side of the window were two sitting areas with softer chairs, shelves of books, and fireplaces. The crew had gathered around the starboard fireplace.

Nicolle shrugged and looked to the group, “I don’t know if we should even try to leave. What if this Tet person is really Gef’s brother?”

Wacamolo replied, “Even if we could be sure that he was, can we be sure of his intentions? Why has he separated us?”

“He might look like Gef, but I don’t trust him,” added Nicolle.

Wherever the conversation was heading, it was cut short by the door to the room opening and three figures entering. One was Tet, taller than anyone in the group. The second figure, Gef, was the same height as Tet. However, the third figure loomed over Tet and Gef, easily two heads taller. It was s synthezoid to be sure, but it was far bulkier than Tet or Gef. Before anyone in the group could decide what to do, Nip came sweeping down from the high ceiling and dove on the larger synthezoid spinning around its head, squeaking what could only be exclamations of joy and surprise. The groups looked on in confusion. Xistra shouted, “Nip! There you are!”

Po also rolled across the room and bumped into this new synthezoid’s feet until the synthezoid bent down and picked it up, Po appeared like a tiny pearl in the giant hands. Finally, Ka’Rolly, approached and reached up to put its hands on the shoulders of the newcomer.

Tet observed and then spoke, “I see some of you have the ability to detect the quode in this being. The rest of you... hmm... not so fast on the uptake, hm?”

Nicolle and Wacamolo and Xistra all exchanged unsure glances. Rilla, however, approached the massive being and looked up. It looked down into her eyes. Rilla’s mouth dropped open slowly. “Able?”

A familiar voice came out of the synthezoid, “Hi, Rilla.”

“What!” Shouted Rilla in disbelief. “Able! How are you in there?” She began looking around the legs and up into Able’s new torso.

Able squatted down and even then was still taller than Rilla. “This is my new body. Do you like it?”

“Well... is it armor? Can you take it off and come out?”

“It doesn’t quite work like that. It’s just me.”

Nicolle followed Rilla’s lead and approached Able, “Hi, Able. My how you’ve grown!” She laughed at her own joke and then turned and hugged Gef. “We were really worried.”

Gef stepped back and looked into Nicolle’s eyes, “I’m fine.”

“Good.”

“It would seem that my brother here was being overly cautious with us.”

“Children, friends,” Tet interrupted. “I would like all of this explained to everyone. Might I suggest we all sit down to discuss what comes next?” Tet gestured to the long dining table. “We have a lot to plan before we go and find the Ultracircus, don’t we?”