# Chapter 34

## Arrival at Sund

Rilla sat atop Able’s newly augmented, massive right shoulder and it felt wondrous and strange. His reconfigured form was an assurance in ways to her, potentially protection. He felt like a tank. Yet Able’s hesitant movements betrayed the lingering disorientation that seemed to plague him since the transformation. In that way, she pitied him. In their wanderings through the ornate, carven halls of the floating fortress, there were times when a simple door posed a perplexing puzzle to Able. He would set Rilla down with care and then bend and turn and squat to pass through some portal. Occasionally these efforts were met with a dull clang as he hit his side on door jambs or his head on overhanging beams. At other times he would duck and turn at some broad archway when it was clear that such actions were not at all necessary.

“Able, you didn’t even have to put me down. There’s plenty of room.” Rilla would chide.

At these admonishments, Able would stop and look at his hands as if they belonged to someone else and then he might look wistful at Rilla and murmur, “You’re so small now.”

In their wanderings, investigating with Po, they had discovered that Sulcata Nur Waya was the name of the fortress and that, actually, the name of the Silt Sea turtle itself was an enormous mouth full: Hada Makhan Jenjenyen Basel el Zogann. Her name was known only because it was written in some historical texts by the people who built Sulcata Nur Waya. Even Tet said he was not able to communicate with her yet. Nonetheless, she responded to commands from the bridge, again, for reasons unknown to anyone.

They explored as the giant Silt Sea turtle made its way to their destination: the city of Sund, the city of bridges. They found themselves on the bridge with Tet, Gef, Nicolle and Ka’Rolly. The bridge was situated in a bubble halfway up the foremost tower of Sulcata Nur Waya. From the orb of glass, one could see far to the horizon of the sea in three directions. Nicolle pointed out to them how fast Hada could move because the Skybow had already thickened out quite a bit from when they had been at the equator near the Eye.

Massive, dark cliffs had begun to rise up from the horizon north as well; the Cliffs of Hallokargin and the southern border of the Krunmyn lands. Tet, looking at the cliffs, spoke, “The Cliffs of Hallokargin are famous for their fjords.”

“What’s a fee-yord?” asked Able.

Tet turned away from the view to Able and Rilla (still perched on Able’s shoulder like a bird), “Fjords are massive chasms that cut into the land from the sea. They are very deep, which is good. We will be able to approach Sund quite close before we need to disembark.” Turning back to the window, Tet continued, “Sund actually used to be two cities on either side of the largest of the fjords, Krazackjord. There was Sundxi and Sundla. Because of that, there were many bridges that crisscrossed Krazackjord. The cities collapsed some time ago—“

“During the Breach,” said Gef with some consternation.

Tet stared at Gef for a long moment. “Yes. During the breach, the cities collapsed and the populace largely now lives on the bridges.”

Nicolle asked, “Why go to Sund?”

Tet answered, “It is still a significant trading hub. We will be able to gather supplies for our trip north to Uchava.”

Nicolle continued her inquiry, “And what’s in Uchava?”

“In Uchava, we will be able to acquire an airship.”

“An airship!?” declared Rilla.

Tet smiled at her enthusiasm. “Yes. Able, would you be so kind as to have your Po display the Ultracircus again?”

“Sure.” Able took Po out of his cozy belt pouch and rolled him on the floor toward the bridge’s navigation console. Po, with a chirp, dutifully displayed a light sculpture of the lumbering Ultracircus, crawling through the air but going nowhere.

Pointing at the light sculpture, Tet explained “The appendages of the Ultracircus are nearly 1000 meters in height. The city is, of course, meant to be impenetrable. We must approach it via the air. And though we now have the means to locate it, we do not know who occupies it, if anyone at all since the council dispersed.” Tet paused. “That’s another reason to go to Uchava as a matter of fact. I am hoping to find Erra.” Tet looked to Gef to see if there was any recognition, but Gef’s face remained blank. Tet sighed. “Erra was the Aaraamyn council member. If she is in Uchava or nearby, she may have more information about what we will encounter when we approach the Ultracircus.”

Nicolle spoke, “The only scientist from the council we’ve managed to find is of course my dear Vivian. She’s who-knows-where now. And then, Able knew Evo. What makes you think that this Erra will still be... around?”

Able looked at the ground, a profound sadness in his heart, hearing his mother’s name again.

Tet placed his hands behind his back. “Frankly, I don’t.” He rubbed his forehead. “It’s been nearly a hundred years since the breach and I have never managed to find one of the council members. I can certainly account for ht fact that Enkiset is gone.”

“Who is Enkiset?” Asked Rilla.

Tet smiled a withering smile. What no one knew in this room could fill the fortress itself. “He was my master. Gef’s as well.” Tet shot Gef another sharp glance. Gef shrugged. “He was, in some ways, the leader of the Council of Scientists.”

Nicolle folded here arms. “There was no leader of the Council of Scientists.”

Tet replied, “Let’s just say that while many of the council members were content to do nothing about the Breach, Enkiset took action. If you knew Vivian so well, you would know that she assisted him.”

Nicolle looked quizzical. “She never said anything about an Enkiset.”

Squinting, Tet examined Nicolle. “Strange.”

The group stood in thought.

“Regardless,” continued Tet. “The plan remains. We disembark at Sund, gather what we need for a trip North to Uchava, get an airship and then find the Ultracircus. Are we agreed?”

Nicolle and Gef nodded. Able just said, “Sounds good,” to which Rilla added with almost a cheer, “Sounds fun!” Tet smiled at the child, but knew, in his heart, there was no going to be much fun about it.

* * *

With Hada sitting still in the Silt Sea, the crew embarked to the fjord of Sund in a smaller skiff that Tet had. As they glided into the fjord itself, surrounded by massive high walls, The city of Sund came into view. Bridges criss-crossed the Sund fjord, too numerous to count. Some were wide enough for four carts to pass each other and still have room for market stalls along the sides. Some of the bridges were only wide enough for two large Krunmyn to methodically pass one another, their only greeting a subsonic rumble.

The crew peered up at the bridges in awe of the bustle of pulleys, ropes and cranes. The whole haphazard construction, part steel beams and cables, part rusty iron, part wood and thick twine, looked like a massive game of cat’s cradle that might collapse at any moment. Beneath that, the fjord was filled with all manner of silt craft, some shiny and advanced, other ancient. Most of the craft had palettes of equipment and rates being raised aloft from their decks. The palettes spun slowly as they were raised up to the bridge city. This was the crew’s pan as well: send up that equipment and supplies they had, Tet replenishing much of what they needed. Then, they could purchase winter supplies in the city for crossing the Boloran mountain range north. Tet had warned the group that it would be nothing like crossing the Cullen mountains.

All was going according to plan until the crew tried to strap Arthra up with large canvas bands. She shook, then bucked in a wave, then leapt right off the skiff, ran across the fjord silt, up the cliff wall and hid underneath the first bridge that would hold and cover her. Most the work in the fjord ceased as laborers watched her with fascination—most in Sund never having seen a badlands pede before.

Tet, ever practical, said, “We definitely require her for the crossing though we could purchase steeds more accustomed to the Boloran.”

Annoyed, Gef replied, “She’ll come around. She always does.”

“She’s not scared,” observed Able. “She likes to be able to observe new places from a safe spot.”

Rilla laughed and grabbed Nicolle’s leg. “Able can see into your bo-o-o-nesss!”

Able gave Rilla a playful swat.

“Ow, Able! You’re too big to do that now.“

Squatting down, he rubbed the spot on Rilla where he had hit her. “I’m so sorry, Rilla I keep forgetting.”

“S’okay but I wish I could get bigger too.”

Xistra ruffled Rilla’s hair. “You will It just takes nomex longer.”

“Will I get as big as you?”

“I’m dustmyn, so probably bigger.”

Rilla looked to Nicolle. “Will I get bigger than you?”

Nicolle beamed back, “We’ll just have to see.”

Tet handed out slips of paper. “I’ve divided our supply list into relevant bridge districts. Find what you can and let’s meet back above the skiff on the forward docking bridge at sunset.”

* * *

“Let’s slip in here,” said Nicolle.

Xistra rolled her eyes, “A mystic shop?”

“Look. The woman behind the counter is fairer. Maybe she can suggest a proper offering for when we arrive at Uchava.”

“Well...”

“I want to see,” joined Able. “It looks neat.”

Xistra and Nicolle exchanged glances. Nicolle put her hand on Able’s shoulder. “A lot of the things in this shop will be very delicate. It would really be for the best if you waited out here.”

Able twiddled his thumbs and sighed. “Okay.”

The inside of the shop was a menagerie of hanging feathered dark wood staffs, rings, Zendo boards, Navi beads and charts and other misclanium on every inch of every shelf from floor to ceiling. The woman behind the counter was also covered in feathers, robed, her arms crossed on the counter, her eyes closed. As Xistra and Nicolle approached, she spoke with a haunting cooing voice, “You seek a final lesson not given to you by those you trusted most... No!” The fairer woman opened her very large, massive and golden eyes with pupils of black that nearly filled their circumference set on either side of a long, wide nose ending in a short beak. Her head jutted dramatically forward on her neck. “The lesson seeks you.”

Nicole waited until it was clear the shopkeepers was done speaking and then said, “We’re on our way to Uchava and—“

“Do not go yet! You must seek the vault.”

“We were really just looking for—“

“You must go! Do you not hear it calling?” At this, the woman turned her flat circular face entirely sideways. “You are acolytes are you not?”

Nicolle and Xistra simultaneously looked puzzled. “How could you know that?” asked Nicolle.

The fairex’s eyes widened more (which seemed impossible) “Your auras. They are luminous.” The woman put her feather-covered hand to her chin, her eyes darting back and forth from Nicolle to Xistra, “though they are quite different.”

Smiling, Xistra and Nicolle looked each other up and down.

“You doubt!” In a near silent flurry of activity, the fairex grabbed pieces and parts, a glass tube and a crystal. Within moments she handed Xistra an instrument of some kind. “Before the Shattering, there were twin cities on either side of the fjord: Sund Lei and Sund Rei. To the west in Sund Lei there was a great library where councilor Grokkon dwelled. Afther the Shattering and the fall of Sund Lei and Sund Rei, an obsidian vault appeared. I have heard it calling for councilors and acolytes alike since I arrived in Sund, but none have answered the call.”

“What makes you say it’s a vault?” Xistra asked.

“There are runes. Many have tried to decode or use them but the vault cannot be opened.”

Xistra held the instrument up and turned it and watched as the crystal in the circular glass tube stayed in position in some liquid

“The crystal is also tuned to the vault. My device will show you the way through he ruins.”

“Thank you,” said Nicolle.

“We still need gifts for our visit to Uchava,” added Xistra.

“Ah, Uchava! How I miss it. I have precisely what you will want.”

* * *