# Chapter 36

## The Launch of the Avion Ghendra

The plan turned out to be that Tet would steer Sultana nur Waya toward the coast of Hallokargin, land of the Krunmyn. There was a fjord there deep enough for Sultana nur Waya to get close to land. In that fjord was the city of Sund, largest trading city of the Krunmyn. The cliff walls of the vast fjord were attached to one another by massive bridges. However, these bridges upon closer inspection were more than bridges, each bridge itself a small city with towers and markets and thousands of people living on them. Atop the cliff walls were the sister cities of Sund Leo and Sund Bea. The criss-crossing bridge cities were known as Sund Minas.

After Tet had released and debriefed the crew on a path to the Ultracircus, they retired to the Craft Siltmere to let Captain Ona and her crew know what was going on. To a sailor, Ona’s crew wished to return to Siltstone to get some “regular” cargo. Able’s crew’s belongings and Arthra were unloaded on to Surtana nur Waya. The two crews said their goodbyes and the Craft Siltmere set sail only few hours after arriving at Sund. Watching the silt craft drift toward the horizon, Gef stood next to Tet. “Well, they were a handy vessel. How do you intend to get to the Ultracircus now?”

Tet turned to Gef with a wry smile. “Why, dear brother, I thought you would never ask.” Tet looked back to the horizon. “We’re going to fly.”

* * *

The tunnels of Sultana nur Waya wound all over and all the way back to the rear of the shell of Shume. There, Tet had brought Gef and Able and Nicolle. The other had stayed back to feed Arthra and organize their belongings for a new voyage aboard Tet’s Airship. The airship sat before Gef and Able and Nicolle and didn’t look like much. Nicolle ventured to say, “I don’t know that I trust this thing to fly.”

“Nonsense,” said Tet. “Surely you are enough of a scientist, Nicolle, that you can see the three principles of flight at work here—even with the ship de-activated.”

Nicolle walked up to the airship and looked around it. “It looks like there are ballasts to keep the ship afloat.”

“Correct. I will need you and any other members of the crew that can create helocanths. We’ll need to fill the base of the ship to get it airborne.”

“The wings look like something used for steering.” She peered up and on each side of the long iron ship were multiple pairs of insect wing-like constructions.

Tet smiled. Nicolle, having know Vivian, was proving to be a very well educated mind. Tet could make good use of that. Finally Nicolle said, “And it looks like there’s additional propulsion in these pods.” Off the middle height of the ship were a number of pods that curved from a sphere shape in the front to a cone shape on the other side. “Maybe exhaust...” She said.

“Correct again, Ms. Nicolle. These pods can serve to convert the helocanths into forward propulsion or downward propulsion for landing.”

Nicolle smiled and looked to Gef as if to say, *See, I’m pretty smart*. Gef replied with a smile and a shrug as if to say, *I never had any doubt*. “Well,” Nicolle said aloud, “let’s get this thing airborne then.”

* * *

The crew, with help from Tet’s Vim, loaded all of their gear on to the ship, as well as Arthra. There was also a lot of cargo loaded on to the ship for Tet. Several very large crates were loaded into the ship’s cargo hold, located above the ballasts. Able, with his new body, was afforded feats of strength he had never experienced before. He was able to lift much more than he ever used to. As he picked up heavy, large crates and moved them into the hold, he daydreamed about what it might have been like had he had this body back in the Idex Mortez. He chuckled. His brother wouldn’t have messed with him in that case.

Able, Nicolle, Rilla, Xistra, and Wacamolo set to making helocanths—small, hot spherical clouds—and pressing them into the various intake valves around the ship. As they proceeded, for several hours, the ship became lighter and lighter and began to float off the ground, restrained only by some cables hooked on to its deck. After a time, Tet came around and hooked corrugated tubes on to the intake valves so that the group could continue to push helocanths into the ballasts of the ship.

At one point, Able stopped loading heloanths and stepped over to Tet. “What is the name of your ship?”

Tet looked up from some manifest papers. “Pardon? Name?” Tet looked at the ship. “It’s never had a name.”

“It has to have a name.”

“Why?”

Able shrugged. “I’ve only been around ships with names. How else would you talk about it?”

“Well, Able, it doesn’t have a mind, so there’s no need to talk about it other than as ‘it’ and ‘the ship’.”

“I think it wants a name.”

“Able, it doesn’t *want* anything.”

“All things want something. If you take that away, you end up with us. We want nothing and everything all at the same time.”

Tet squinted. “Hmm.” Tet considered this and said, “Very well, you may name the ship. What shall you call it?”

“Well,” Able scratched his chin the way Wacamolo might when thinking. “It’s a her,”—Tet scoffed—“and *she* would like to be called The Avion Ghendra.”

“Ghendra?” Tet asked, his curiosity piqued. “Why do you know of Glendra?”

“She’s why I’m here.”

“Go on.”

“I met her when I was running away from my father. She told me about the Ultracircus. She told me to find Gef.”

“She knew Gef?”

“I think so.”

“She knew Gef but didn’t tell you about his memory?”

“No. What about Gef’s memory?”

“Don’t worry about it. I believe there will be answers for all of us at the Ultracircus. And even though I despise Ghendra, we’ll call the ship Avion Ghendra. She did get you here to me, and you are obviously a key to this puzzle.”

“What puzzle?” Able asked.

“Able, I wish I knew. Our scientists seem to be playing games with us. That is all I know.”

* * *

Late in the afternoon, the Avion Ghendra was ready for takeoff. The cargo had been organized and stowed. The ballasts were at maximum helocanth density. The wings had been tested, any holes repaired, and generally tightened. The exhaust pods had been tested, firing brilliant blue jets of flame. The crew gathered in the control center of the ship, with the exception of Ka’Rolly and the Vim, who were on the deck, ready to release the cables holding the airship in place.

At Tet’s signal, the pods were turned toward the bow of the ship and began firing and then the cables were set free by Ka’Rolly and the Vim. As the ship began floating upward, it also drifted backward out of the massive hanger that sat open to the rear end of Shume. The airship drifted out and back until it came out of the hanger completely, beginning to drift up the cliffs of the Sund fjord.

Able looked up form the control center. At the front of the room was a massive glass bubble that afforded the ability to look straight up from the conning tower of the airship. From there, Able could see the skybow of the Goliaths, here at the north shore of the Silt Sea, only visible at a slight angle. Able longed to see the Skybow agin from his home in Idex Mortez, where it was most often a massive, pale blue, semi-circle on the horizon.

As the airship floated into the sky, rising above even Sund Bea’s towers, Able figured that he would go home after all this was over, after they found the Ultracircus. Even if his mother was gone, he had an urge to see his father and brother. Maybe it was just to show off his new body. Maybe it was just to tell them about everything that is out in the wider world. He didn’t know the reason; just the feeling.