# Chapter 37

## To the Vault

“What’s that?” Asked Able, looking at the instrument that Xistra was now holding, turning it back and forth. “We’re not sure,” she said, “But we’re going to follow it.” She looked at Able, “If you dare.”

Able straightened up to his full height and looked rapt. “Should we get the others?”

Xistra and Nicolle shared sly grins and Xistra said, “We’re acolytes. We’ve got this.”

“Here,” Nicolle handed Able the sack of offerings they had purchased. “You’re so big now, you carry stuff.” She winked.

Still processing his child-like voice, Able replied, “Okay!” He liked some parts of being big.

With that, the trio began navigating the Courser bridge, weaving in and out of the market filled with barely moving krunmyn and all manner of caged animals, cooking sells produce crafts and machines which reminded Nicolle, thinking about the runes on the vault, “Able, is Po with you?”

Able pat his satchel. “Always.” A muffled sequence of beeps of greeting emitted from the satchel.

“Hi, Po,” Nicolle and Xistrqa said in unison and laughed.

“I figured if we’re dealing with a vault and runes, surely Po could be of use.”

Po chirped loudly in agreement.

They came to an intersection of bridges, the new one more residential than the Courser. They continued along the new one, made one more switch and came to the western cliffs of the fjord.

The surroundings changed drastically when they stepped on to land. It wasn’t just the loss of the gentle seating of the bridge city that ceased. The smooth natural timber gas way to broken charred beams of steel. The gaily colored shops and homes were exchanged for broken glass and lonely stone pillar sentinels.

“What happened here?” Asked Xistra in a whisper, looking up from the instrument.

“It looks like the center of Kinton Station,” said Able, though his companions had no idea of his meaning.

They continued to climb over the rubble and skeletal remains of the structures, finding the occasional intact pieces of krunmyn sculpture—intricate, delicate artifacts so opposite in aesthetic to the krunmyn species themselves. “So beautiful,” whispered Nicolle.

After passing through a cavernous hall, lit by fading, mote-filled sunbeams and statues of krunmyn heroes in various states of disrepair (looking shockingly like real krunmyn). The trio entered into a massive courtyard where—quite obviously—they had found the vault.

Its appearance was unlike anything else they had seen in the ruins of the city, or anywhere else in the world for that matter. It was more than black. Where light from the courtyard touched it, the light simply vanished. There were no highlights, no reflections. Depending on the angle it was viewed from, it was merely differently shaped triangles or diamonds as if it were flat or even something protruding into three dimensional space.

Nicolle began to walk toward it, practically hypnotized, but Xistra reached out to hold her back. “What?” Nicolle asked.

“Booby traps.” Xistra shook her hair and a shiny cloud of silicon danced around her until she faded into the scenery. She handed Nicolle the device and said “Be right back.”

Able flexed his eyes. “I can see her temperature.” He watched as Xistra shrank into the landscape toward the more-than-black geometry that also appeared to have one temperature—cool—across its entire surface. She slowly disappeared from his view as she walked behind it. Able shifted left then right. Normally he could see temperature through walls, but not the vault. It was as thermally black as it was visually. Nicolle looked on, worried, but Xistra re-appeared on the other side and Able whispered, “She’s back.”

“Back from *where*?” Nicolle asked but Able just said, “She’s coming back toward us now.”

Within minutes, Xistra shimmered into view in front of them. “Well, it’s a pyramid even though any which way you look at it, it just looks like a hole in the universe.”

“Did you touch it?” asked Nicolle.

“I was terrified to.”

“Yeah. Good thinking.”

“There are markings chiseled into the base, but they’re like nothing I’ve ever seen.”

“Can I go look at it?” pleaded Able.

Xistra shrugged. “I don’t think there are any traps.” She looked away to the vault, “unless of course the thing itself is a trap.”

Nicolle offered, “Well, let’s stick close together.”

Upon reaching the vault Able immediately recognized the grids circles. “Cellular automata!” He shouted so loud that Nicolle and Xistra jumped out of their skins.

“Able!” Xistra whisper-shouted.
Sheepishly, Able lowered his voice and said, “Wacamolo showed me this game once.”

Nicolle looked puzzled. “It’s a game?”

Able shrugged. “Not a fun game. You can’t win.” He pulled Po out from his satchel and it cast a lightform demonstration in the air between the three of them. He explained the game as he remembered Wacamolo explaining it: rules about life and death and neighbors. “See, these diamonds formations will never do anything. Some, like this helicopter one—they just repeat forever. And there’s a whole zoo of them—patterns that do different stuff. Show ‘em, Po.”

The grid in the lightform zoomed out to show many different automata busying about.

Xistra pointed to a diamond formation set in a tile at the base of the vault. “So this one does nothing?”

“Yup.”

Xistra pressed it. The tile lit up in a strange way. Any square that had been blank turned into the more-than-black of the vault. Any grid space with a disc turned bright green and appeared to hover over the surface of the more-than-black. The three watched the tile for five milliurns until the grid turned back to chiseled stone.

“Nothing,” said Nicoll.e She pointed to one that had only two discs. “What about that one, Able?”

“That’s a spinner. It just flips and flops.”

“What are we looking for even if we know this game? What about the acolyte business a the store? Xinthe never taught me this.”

“Vivan taught me astrometrics and mathematics but nothing like this,” Nicolle said.

Able came from around the vault which he had circled. “There’s a glider in different stages on each side of the vault.”

“There’s three of us,“ suggested Nicolle.

The trio stood around the edges of the vault each positioned at the tile that Able pointed them to. On the count of three they pressed the tiles.

The vault didn’t so much hum as vibrate the trio’s organs. Even Po moaned. The pyramid lifted off the ground revealing a staircase down into the ground.

“Now we get the others,” said Nicolle to Xistra, but then looked to see Able bounding down the stairs two at a time.

Xistra shook her head. “Gotta love that enthusiasm.”

Once they all reached the bottom of the stairs, thee was a wall with a wheel embedded in it. Able Wass pinning the wheel which turned into the wall and had facets. Able spoke aloud, staring at the wheel, “There are eight facets, each one with a symbol.” He turned the wheel and pointed to one. “This one is one my mother used to wear.” He looked at his hands. “I used to have it on the palm of my left hand, too.” He looked at the ground, sad. “But not anymore.”

Nicolle pat him on the shoulder an edged in next to him to turn the wheel as well. “You really need to wait for the rest of us, Able. Running off like that in a place like this is very dangerous—for all of us.”

Able, still looking athlete ground, “Yeah. Okay.”

Xistra pat his shoulder too and then spoke to Nicolle. “Eight facets, eight council members?”

“Yes. Yes!” Nicolle turned quick to Able and Xistra and took off her ring. “There is Vivian’s symbol.” She pressed the ring into the indention on the facet of the wheel. Lines lit up from the wheel tracing intricate patterns on the wall, followed by a grinding sound and the wall lifting. Beyond the door lay a massive domed chamber. Able asked Po to light the chamber up and held Po high over his head. There was a heavy fog throughout the chamber, thickest at the ground and dissipating. There were machines everywhere, most of them dark or covered in tarps and dust. In the center of the room was a massive stone chair sitting on a Dias. And sitting in the chair was a statue of a krunmyn two heads taller and thicker than any krunmyn the trio had yet seen—a giant.

And then the statue opened its eyes which glowed like light-pierced emeralds and the statue spoke, which sounded like Hada pushing through the Silt Sea, “Zorath kel chromatin.” The entire chamber lit up like daylight. Machines buzzed to life. The krunmyn in the chair (clearly not a statue) leaned forward and spoke again, “Greetings acolyte of Sister Aeon Kamé.”

Nicolle registered no recognition of the name but smiled her best.

The krunmyn scratched his chin. “I suppose post-shattering she went back to her nomex name: Vivian?”

“Yes. Vivian. Brother... ?”

The krunmyn waved his hand. “I also see no point in council names now. You may call me Grokkon.”

Able knew he should keep quiet but couldn’t contain himself. “I’m Able, Brother Dustfish.” and waved his free hand.

The krunmyn leaned forward in his throne and stared for some time. “I have not seen your kind before. You look like a synthezoid and yet...”

“My mother is Evo.”

This made the krunmyn slam his hand into the arm of the chair with the sound of two bricks crashing together. Then he put his other had over his face and laughed. “She did it!” He stood then, towering over the, and took two massive strides toward Able, looking him up and down. “I thought you were meant to be a child?”

“I was—a child—I mean, I *am* a child but then Tet gave me this new big body.”

Grokkon stood up straight, fast even for a krunmyn. His green eyes narrowed. “Tet!? You tell me you’re in league with that menace?”

Xistra stpped forward and spoke. “In league is hardly the phrase any of us would use. He captured us. But he’s done us no harm and knows so much.”

“And you... acolyte of Xinthe?”

“Yes sir.”

“And his state?”

“Unknown. He vanished some time ago.”

Turning his gaze to Nicolle, “And Vivian?”

“Also missing.”

Growing exasperated Grokkon asked “And Evo?”

Able hung his head and Nicolle spoke for him, “She passed on.”

The krunmyn scientist stepped backward and crashed into his chair like an avalanche. He put his head in his hands. “All no doubt perishing themselves n the search for a cure to this cursed shattering.”

Grokkon sat for a long time with his head in hands and  then his chin on his fist. He looked sideways at some device in his lab and finally spoke again, “Able, is it?”

“Yes sir.”

“What is this heavy concentration of nanosphere in your hand?”

“Oh! This is Po.” He held Po forward who chirped a greeting and then projected a lightform likeness of Grokko in front of Grokkon, who raised his brow in an arch.

“What an unusual acrobat. May I see it?” And he bane to hold out his hand.

Able warned, “Now, Po, don’t try to copy his brain.”

Grokkon paused, his hand midway to Po. “Do not copy my brain?”

“Po likes to absorb information. Most of the time it does it with books or cartridges or lightdiscs... but sometimes he does it with people.”

“And what happens to these people?”

“Um... they pass out for a while. But then they seem to be okay.”

Grokkon laughed and finished leaning forward to pinch Po out of Able’s hand. “Quite the contrary, little Po. Have a crack at my brain.”

A shimmer flowed from Po, radiating over Grokkon, who closed his eyes and chuckled. After Po was done, Grokkon held Po between his index finger and thumb up close to his stony face. “I see,” he said. “Now, little Po, show me my childhood home.” Po obliged and Grokkon’s eyes grew round, wistful and he smiled in a way none of the others had ever seen a krunmyn smile. “Wonderful.” The word just floated up out of Grokkon and off into the Skybow. “Thank you, little friend.”

Po chittered a welcome.

Grokkon handed Po back to Able who was in awe that the copying seemed such a nothing to the krunmyn. The whole trio was in awe. “How did you acquire such a fascinating acrobat?”

Able beamed. “I made him.”

“Really?” Asked Grokkon, raising one brow. “Your mother gave you no assistance?”

“Oh. Well, she me three cubes she called quancomes.”

Just then, Nip came flying out of Xistra’s hair and up to Grokkon’s face, just as bright orange as could be, clearly showing off as its three versions circled the krunmyn scientist’s head.

Xistra shouted, “Nip! I told you not to hide on me unless you tell me!”

Nip giggled.

“Interesting,” said Grokkon. “Nip is it?” Grokkon held his hand out, palm up and Nip hovered there. “Please fill my dome,” and he used his other arm to gesture up and out.

Nip vibrated intensely, almost into a blur and then copies of it began zipping off, filling the laboratory with orange lights, a hundred or more.

Nicolle laughed out loud. “They’re not copies at all. They’re superpositions!”

“Vivian taught you well, young one.”

“Nip!” Grokkon’s voice boomed through the chamber, “Please return here to this space only,” and he pointed to the palm of his hand.

One by one, some several at once, Nip flew into itself until there was just one again, floating in Grokkon’s hand. The ancient krunmyn squinted his eyes and let out a gravelly whisper, “Fascinating.” He turned to Able and said, “The devices your mother gave you are very powerful computers. These in particular can also solidify and manipulate the nanosphere in a solid state. Po here has a holographic memory. There is likely little limit to the information it can store. And Nip can manipulate fundamental forces, including even placing his own atoms in superpositions. How did you accomplish this, Able? You programmed them in an unusual way.”

“Yes. I had built lots of machines for my family. My mother taught me how and encouraged it, but father didn’t like it when I went against the rule of entropy. The machines had to do what they were told to do. They didn’t want to do anything. Not like me. My mother told me that was the true source of anentropy in the Universe: desire.”

“You have agency.”

“That’s what my mother called it, too. We programmed the quancoms with what we called function without function. They decided their purpose. Po has always wanted to know stuff. Nip has always wanted to explore.”

“And the third?” asked Grokkon.

“Ka turned into a walking life suit for a dustfish and they do whatever... it is they do. Ka is kind of a protector.”

“Hence the name Brother Dustfish? Apropos, I suppose, although a synthezoid has never sat on the council.”

Able smiled sheepishly.

Grokkon smiled. “I suppose we might consider an exception given your unusual... heritage. Let me ask, who gave you this moniker? Your mother?”

“My friend Gef.”

“Gef is also still alive? The future is becoming clearer.” Grokkon seemed about to say more when an alarm went off and only moment later a sequence of explosions circled the dome, blasting through the ceiling. Without hesitation Grokkon held out both arms and encircled the trio and Nip and Po in a translucent green field. The rubble from the ceiling bounced off of it. He shoved the field out of the gate the group had entered through. He bellowed over the mass of dust and stones falling all around. “Go! Find the Ultracircus. You will find answers there! I believe in Evo, Able!”

“Grokkon! What about you?” Shouted Nicolle.

“I will be find young ones! There’s somewhere I must be! Go! Hurry!” With that, he slammed the gate shut.

They stood in shock, staring at the gate with tunnel shaking until Xistra grabbed Nicolle and Able’s hands and began dragging them up the stairs. They all raced up the winding tunnel;, Nip carrying Po and rushing ahead. They fell out of the vault and picked themselves up just in time to begin sprinting again as the courtyard began to collapse in on the laboratory beneath. By the time they got to what seemed like a safe spot, they turned to see that the courtyard was now just a sinkhole, a massive cloud of dust rising up from its depths.