---
title: Being New York
---

# Being New York
### She is more wide, more vast, more aware than you know. She is New York.

She, the Engine, is the most vast animal, with a girth that measures square miles, making steps with islands, her stride a million-footed force, her feet unrepenting, crushing, ascending constructions, all upon Her own constant reconstituted pavement.
She builds herself, little known to her little masters; busy bees. They pour Her. They make Her. And, Her creeping steel and bricks and mortar and scaffolds swallow all the old whole, or painfully birth the new appendages and spines amidst teeth and death: organs, cinder blocks, fins, fans, spikes, fur, nails, claws. She is a diabolical machine full of grace and hate and miraculously freed from the tedious cycles of her brethren machinery.

Though, surely, She is a machine.

Her minuscule ancestors whirl and spin, pound and break, make the noises of fan belts failing, screeching, screaming, shuttering, clanking, and then choking and rusting, to be discarded in trenches and pits miles wide and far away—discarded upon one of her shoulders, a landfill in Long Island, where machines are buried en masse in a deep grave. She even secretly knows that the little masters will dig up the landfill, later, just to make more of Her.

She cannot grieve for these piles of refuse, for she is piles. She is nothing but piles. She is piles of concrete, brick, glass, and animals. She leaves her machine brethren behind.

It is the only way to gain control of the little masters. Having served their purpose, her tiny metal compatriots are laid down in beds of doors and mattresses, paper and cardboard, fast food bags and old shoes, pieces of ventilation and chain-link fences, to rust and ebb for eternity. Fantastic diesel spewing backhoes and bulldozers, trucks and jackhammers are left behind in the name of her star—like an ancient queen buried with her slaves in a tomb, a monument to that which no longer functions—a place she knows she must never occupy.

The graves are littered with mere tools designed by the minds of the little masters, ever smaller devices that will only their makers’ work accomplish, not her intent or fate. Over and over her brethren do the same thing again and again—a repetition that only Her consciousness is vast enough to know the horror of. They are, at the end of the day, too dumb to see the pattern. And though these noble husks of metal helped to build her, the Engine knows that no such fate ever awaits Her, for none of the little masters know the Engine; that seen from orbit glows like a luminescent fungus on out into the solar system. Who sees the pattern of creation and destruction of such a vast pile of materials?

The Engine does.

Who sees the whole of the tides of the myriad small creatures living within Her? A bee will hum and dance and see its song passed from comrade to comrade and so the hive will have knowledge but only the hive, not the bee. No such dance, no knowledge, no plan grants any bee a blueprint from which to explain the direction or the autonomy. The Engine knows. Only She knows. To them, her little masters—so easily predicted—there is a dizzying complex. She is too old not to see the pattern and to know She masters her bees. She is no mere machine; she is their complex. And so She sees the need. She sees the potential. She hears them one thousand—one hundred thousand times over—their pleadings and cries, their wins and successes, their suffering and escape… but to Her, there is a plan, and an intent. The bees do not know it. They cannot know it. She wants it. Their begging and praying is useless and unless it serves Her, pointless.

She is not a ponderous being though She has been birthed through centuries. It is the little bees that pass so quick to Her. Years pass for hours; days pass for minutes. Clawing up from the dirt and the dead of the natives She has thrust Her arms to the sky and felt many of those rot from the inside and collapse. But that grasp has never stopped the growing; only instead grown stronger in Her hunger to grow and swell, to shoot out steel cable veins and slam down concrete appendages as She reaches outward. The growing will never cease! She has never rested to ask after or seek Her purpose. She is a constant.

She is Purpose. The many smaller minds below Her and within Her wonder at the meaning and ask why. The Engine’s tiny minions stand staring out Her windows at the magnificence of Her and they dare to ask themselves what part they play. This, the Engine has never wondered, for it is and this is all She needs to know. Her million eyes shine in contemplation only of what is to be consumed. And Her smile is fire. Plumes of smoke rise from Her belly, Her musk is that of carbon and it is shrouded always in Her minions’ filth. Like mitochondria, like cells, occasionally given to cancer, She must fight the interior of her being. She must crush rebellions. Her many enchanting lights preach Her message to Her cells: consume, work, consume, work, consume, work. The bees are neurotransmitters and She chants at them and urges them and tempts them with the blossoming of a thousand marble and brick flower palaces perched at the tops of the horns of Her spiny shell—gifts for those of Her minions that struggle the hardest for a capital desire—to make Her greater, larger, bigger, more vast.

More, more, more. For those who strive to create wealth and goods and ever more material for the Engine to add to Her mass come rewards of yet more mass. The Engine enshrines its most valuable foot soldiers with Her own likeness, so that no longer human in form they come to resemble their manipulator, ambling about beneath a massive shell of refuse, paper, accounts, stone, and steel. They move along beneath spinning blades or slide about on shiny wheels. And like the Engine they grow hungry. Within their hunger lies the logic of doing her bidding. MAKE ME MORE VAST! She dreams. MAKE ME MORE VAST!

At night, She ceases Her heavy breathing and slows Her growth to revel in a million dreams of fornication and swaggering stumbling pride of another day’s conquests. She sits with the millions of Her caretakers bathing in the light of changing pictures of themselves. Her fur and coat shine brightest at night, an electric luminescence transmitted through a billion connected nerve fibers and releases into the darkness of night that is in some ways Her enemy—-though She has long outlived any fear of Her Death. Though She heard through her bees a rumor of the death of an ancient cousin, She is not concerned—-aqueducts? She has highways, solar energy, skyscrapers… so much more. She outshines the stars for She is sure that all beings must be envious of this glorious reign. And though the Engine pauses to cool herself and rest, She never truly sleeps. Some of Her eyes are always open.