---
title: Love is But a Guess
---

It's odd to think that any distance to a person that you care about must only be yards or feet or miles. It's odd to think that there could be a measurement involved—distance to just any person, yes, but distance to one you love? The distance *feels* non-existent. At one and the same time I do not know the distance to my wife, Josie, and yet there is no distance. I know she is thinking of me right now—this instant—and I am thinking of her. Yet, I know the distance is measurable. In fact, right now, the actual distance feels immeasurable.

A person that we care about is close beyond dimension; one of those secret folded dimensions that astrophysicists are always talking about. They are always with us. And I supposed that's the truth of it. If couldn't know, then I couldn't love. The love I have, it's inside of me. It's not really "out there." If I die, my love for anything will certainly vanish with me. And even though I feel it in my bones, in my heart, that Josie is still out there, there is the possibility that she is not and her love for me has already died.

We are memory machines that do nothing but observe and detail the motions, emotions and behaviors of the ones we watch; we calculate to predict. I know Josie loves me because she's told me so. When she's gone, I can predict that she will still love me. When she returns, I can predict that she will love me then. But, if the truth is what is at stake here, I simply cannot know that she loves me right now. I cannot know it because I don't know if she's alive. Even love is a prediction.

If enough exchanges have occurred, and if enough of those communications have been accurate enough to yield trust, then love is the chemical bond that solidifies our secondary, rational notions of trust. In a sense, we do nothing but use our place in memories as sacred locations to copy and ensure or bury or archive the ones we love. We are welcome to let them go, but we will never truly let them go, because we have memorized them and we carry their copies in our minds until we die. I carry my love for Josie, but her love for me is only a copy. And like all copies, it suffers from entropy, from a gradual breakdown. When I think of my love for her, it is present and intense, her face lights up my memory. When I think of her love for me, it's not so intense. I assume it is intense in her, but how can I ever really know? It's a copy of her love that she has given to me in pieces and over time.

And who of those in this life have we chosen to archive in our trillion neuron connected minds? I think it is those that we have loved, definitely. But how have they come to pass through our journey? This, the question of love given over to those who we deem worthy of a cross of our own paths; that's enough? There is a universe of probability that dictates that there is no chance that we randomly run across the perfect love; rather we run into the requisite love. The love that works. It is not the love that we dream of. That love is the universe's love, and it belongs somewhere else in our hearts. My love for Anna is absolute but as she is my daughter it is different from my other loves.

We use the phrase "close to me" to indicate that someone or some heart or some love is close to use no matter how far away they are. If you love something set it free, if it loves you it will come back. Miles must separate you at first; prior to the return. Still, the return. I cannot think of anything more fantastic and wonderful for any human alive. That is the best day: the return of love. If the best day of love never returns, we have memorized our loves as best we can and we carry them with us for as long as we live; as long as our own lives return to us.