# Chapter 10

## In which the crew gets the attention of the Baron.

The stairs led to more stairs hick led to hallways and more doors until Gef was certain, upon examining a certain wall, that they were inside the walls of the city. He found a grate, low to the ground. He told Able to put on his disguise again and he did so himself. Nip and Po tucked themselves away in pouches on Able's belt and Ka'Rolly pulled its cloak back over its head and around its newfound body. Then the crew exited through the grate and a short tunnel into an alleyway between the city walls and the city itself. There was no one around. From where they were, they could see numerous buildings, two and three stories tall, and then lording over all of them, the castle itself—a massive horn with balconies and windows and passageways carved into it, spiraling around its gray, curved mass, pointing at the sky.

"We have to go there?" said Able peering up at the enormous structure.

"Yeah. And it will be heavily guarded."

"I could fly up with Nip." Nip chirped in agreement.

"Yeah. Yeah you could. But we all need to stay together."

"Really," Able said, "You're the only one who can't fly."

Gef looked down at Able, hurt. "You know. You're right. Maybe I should do something about that." He laughed. "For the moment though, let's just scout out the place."

They walked down streets and alleys, generally toward the base of the horn, which was hard to accomplish because none of the streets went in any manner of a straight line. As they moved, more and more people began to emerge. Able noted quickly that things were different than at Kinton Station. The people looked haggard, gray, unhealthy. In many places there were people squatting at the side of the street, holding out bowls and jars, begging for food or water or metal. Able would have given them anything he had, but with the exception of the electrol or his clothes he had nothing. It created a feeling within him that was an awful sorrow.

And why water? They had just come from a place with more water than he had ever seen, but these people had none. He wanted to tell them about the grate and how to go down the stairs and where to get all the water they wanted, but Gef told him no; that they needed to keep to themselves for a while still. Able didn't like this either.

Then there were the guards. There were people in metallic suits, eight feet tall, that hissed and smoked when they walked. They pushed other people out of their way. Once, when walking down a street, Gef had to push Ka'Rolly and Able off to the side just to get out of the way of the mechanomen, or be knocked over.

"I don't like this place, Gef. I don't like this place at all."

"Me neither, kid."

After hours of wandering through streets they came to a wide open square with the gates to the castle on the far side. Lines of the mechanomen stood around the gates. All around the rest of the square were statues that rested in large concrete bowls. They should have been fountains. People milled about the square, gathering in small groups, talking. At the edge of the square, any number of people stood at tables, trading wares.

"You know, kid, besides your great idea of just flying up to the top, I'm starting to think that maybe our best plan of action is to simply announce ourselves."

"What do you mean?"

"I mean, we get Po to do that dragon thing again and have it ask to see the Baron."

"I thought you wanted to be quiet and stay low?"

"Well, that was then. Now we have... different... circumstances. And listen, if they do take us, which I suspect they will. You need to let me do the talking—act like the mistakes are mine, okay?"

"Why?"

"If something goes wrong, I need you to take Nip and get the heck out of here. I don't think we should let the Baron know what you really are. I'll tell him you're my assistant or something."

"What am I really?" Able asked.

Gef chuckled and put a hand on Able's shoulder. "You're unique. And you need to get to the Ultracircus."

Able smiled at this.

"Look, if something goes wrong, take Nip and go back to Kinton Station. Get Arthra if you can. Sneak into town and find Wacamolo. He'll help you."

Able didn't like this at all, the idea of losing Gef. "Okay."

"Don't worry. This is gonna work. Now loan me Po."

"I can't really—"

"I know, I know. Jus let m hold him."

Able took Po out of the pouch on his belt and held the mistake up to his face. "Can you help Gef? I have more than enough electrol for you, okay? We know where to get lots now!" He handed Po to Gef.

The crew walked to the center of the square. Gef held Po up to his face and said, "Do that dragon thing and have it say, 'I demand to see the Baron Rollo Leocadia!' Can you do that?" Po sighed and signaled yes. Gef held Po up in the air.

Just by coincidence, a very thick cloud rolled in over the city and the dim light grew dimmer as Po's lights reached out and danced all over the square. People immediately stopped what they were doing and looked at the sky and around he square for the source of the dancing lights. Their eyes fell on a dustman who was holding up some sort of orb that was growing in size and shining lights everywhere. The lights began to coalesce into a stream of light that slithered in the air, and then grew hair and legs and scales. It formed a long dragon that then coiled into a pile resting above Gef and Po. The dragon looked at the gate and then up the tower, "Bring me Baron Rollo Leocadia!"

Everyone in the square was frozen. The guards rushed to form new lines in between the gate and the dragon. They drew weapons and stood at the ready. Thunder boomed and Gef smiled at his luck. Able turned to look at the crowds all around them.  Some wore faces of amazement, while other looked on with dread. He put his hand in his pouch and clasped Nip who buzzed in agreement with a sound like "Woah."

Gef looked up, past the dragon and saw that another light was forming at the top of the tower, and he realized that's where the thunder was coming from, not the sky. And then a howling came from the top of the tower, and another dragon came swooping down, crying with maniacal laughter. It swooped down to the square and crashed through the shimmering light dragon that Po had created. It swam through the air in a circle around the square and bellowed, "You have called, fools! I am arrived!" The dragon crashed into he square between the lines of guards and Gef and Po and even knocked a few of the guards off there feet, sending them flying. The dragon shoved its face right in front of Gef and bellowed again, "Who dares!?"

Gef held his ground, even though he had no clue what to do next. "I am Draxon the scientist. I wish to parlay and to discuss developmets."

The dragon considered this and then began to shrink and transformed into a fat noman covered with cybernetics. "An electric message wouldn't have sufficed?"

Gef said nothing as the large noman approached him.

The Baron's left eye was all machine and the silver lense that was there in the eye's place stared through Gef. "A dustman scientist? How interesting." The eye shifted and changed. "Oh! A synthezoid scientist. How *very* interesting." The Baron looked at Ka'Rolly and Able. "And what interesting companions as well."

He looked back to Gef. "Fine then. Let us go to my chambers." He turned his hands up toward the sky and a circle of stones from the square shook and then lifted off the ground, carrying the Baron and the crew up into the air. The Baron commented, "Impressive use of the weather I might add." The Baron turned his back to the crew and guided the rock platform up to the top of the tower towards a large balcony. Gef turned to Able and shrugged. Able smiled back.

* * *

The Baron's chambers were a massive circular room, lined with bookshelves with ladders on wheels that reached ten meters up. The bookshelves ended where windows began and the windows were just as tall. The floor of the room was marble so polished it gleamed. There was a massive door at one end of the room, guarded by the ominous mechanomen. Opposite the door was a dias with a large chair the the Baron settled his weight into, he poured into he chair. And in the center of the room, reaching up to and through the dome of the ceiling, was a series of tubes, beginning small at the floor and growing in width and length as it reached upward.

"First things first," the Baron said. The acoustics of the room were architected to make his voice appear to be coming from everywhere in the room. "You may remove your disguises. I certainly understand why you would wish to hide your true nature from the dregs, but you need not worry here. I am appreciative of the fact that a synthezoid could engage in science. There is no requirement regarding species for those who seek knowledge, is there?"

Gef agreed, "Yes." He removed his mask and his hat and poncho. Able and even Ka'Rolly did the same.

"Your programs are impressive," the Baron said. Gef started to reply but the Baron raised his hand and said, "Wait. Let us have a true parlay." He reached for a horn near his chair and shouted something into it. Bookcases along the wall opened, and out came running noman in very nice clothes carrying a long table, chairs and several platters of food. The table was placed in front of the crew, along with chairs for Albe, Gef and Ka'Rolly. The Baron got up from his throne and (with some effort) walked down the stairs to a chair of his own at the table.

Once he was seated, the Baron said, "Now. If you will indulge me, my good colleague, could I pester you with some questions?" He reached for some slices of meat, "And I assume that none of you eat?"

Gef replied, "Ask anything you wish, and no, I and my assistants do not require sustenance."

"Of course, of course. Now, this one," and the Baron pointed at Ka'Rolly, "An organic-programmatic mixture?"

"Yes," said Gef, deciding that agreeing with guesses was a good strategy.

"Why?"

"Why?"

"Yes. Why create such a creature?"

Gef thought through what he knew from the Cyclo, some kind of concept to justify Ka'Rolly. "An experiment, if you will."

"Ah yes. Not unlike my mechanomen I suppose."

"Precisely. I am also interested in how you created *them*."

The Baron waved his hand in dismissal. "Primetive really. Noman dregs implanted with circuitry and then programmed thusly. Mere automatons. And stupid to boot." The baron swallowed chunks of meat, a dribble of something running down his chin. "You see, if I had the ability to create—well, no offense—but something like you—synthezoids—I'd have no need for such abominations." The Baron stared at Able, making him uncomfortable. "This little one, you see. Did you create him?"

"Yes." Said Gef. Able gave him a dirty look.

"And where did you come by the knowledge for such a thing? How did *you* even gain your autonomy? I've never met a synthezoid with free will, if you don't mind my saying."

"As for my free will, that is a bit of a secret."

"I see. Yes. Of course."

"And as for any more information, I would be willing to share more for a price."

"A price!?" The Baron laughed, though Gef was not sure at all why. "Very well. What price?"

"I am in search of a Texo compass."

"Really? How droll." The Baron tore apart some bread. "I don't understand. If you can concoct these programs, you don't need my help manufacturing a Texo compass."

"It's not the compass itself I need any help with. It's the thing to which it is attached that is giving me trouble."

"Oh? And what thing is that?"

"The Ultracircus." For emphasis, Po, sitting next to Gef at the table threw up a light model of the ambling city.

Again, the Baron laughed obnoxiously and banged the table. "The Ultracircus! Are you serious!?"

"Quite."

"And when you find it, what sort of wishes are you planning on asking for from those doddering, old idiots?"

"No. I have no wishes. I mean, I'd like to—" Gef thought better of mentioning the cyclopedia. Judging from the books in the library, the Baron knew quite a lot and mentioning that he wanted to complete the cyclopedia might give him away as an imposter. "I simply want to discuss my... programs."

"Hm," said the Baron. "The council doesn't know anymore about manipulating the nanosphere than *I* do, and they certainly can't produce independent programs the likes of yours. Tell me, what do they do?" The Baron leaned forward greedily. "Maybe a texo compass for one of them would be a fair bargain?"

Able kicked Gef under the table as Gef was thinking. "Yes, well, I'm afraid that part of creating them is giving them free will. I couldn't trade one of them unless they wished to go. However, let me ask, does this mean that you have a texo compass attached to the Ultracircus?"

The Baron spread his hands. "We both have cards, I suppose. At this juncture, I am not willing to say if I have such a device."

"An impasse, then."

"Only for the moment, my good Draxon. Let us think on the matter. I insist that you enjoy my abode for as long as you like. Enjoy my library." The Baron gestured with a grand wave to all of his books. "And in the meantime, we shall both think about what we want and what is required for us both to gain it." The Baron smiled broadly, but Able didn't think it was a nice smile—more like the smiles on those smoke tigers.