# Chapter 23

## Escape from the Synthetic Simians

The mists continued to grow as the hills continued to flatten. Now objects loomed out of the mist here and there, sometimes taking on the appearance of walking creatures, sometimes just floating. At one point Athra had to stop in her tracks as a massive cube appeared out of the mist and stood in her way. It was easily three times her size and when Gef bade her to go around, the cube just moved to keep blocking her way.

She stopped again making an inquisitive sound for Gef. Before Gef could say anything, the cube moved off and away into the mist. And it didn't even move off into the mist as must as it appeared to just move away and become mist.

The sun now, because of the mist, appeared more like a lamp in the sky, its outline visible, its color almost blue. There were masses of cables, some a meter in diameter, like the ones near the Cullen Mountains, that were wound together and reached up toward the dim sun. Some outgrowths of cables grew upward like columns, others slumped over, others had found each other and wound together and formed massive arches over bending over the crew like bridges.

In the mist, aside from the objects appearing and disappearing,  and the crops of cables, there was a constant blinking of tiny lights. And the mist had a roiling quality to it like static on a screen. Able had climbed to the front of Athra to sit next to Gef. "Gef?"

"Yeah, buddy?"

"Um, you know that looky-thing you taught me to do?"

"Yeah."

"Well, I've been doing it and I think this mist..." Able felt the need to lean in and whisper, "I think it's *alive*."

"Yeah. Me too."

"And what's maybe worse—um—it's sticking to all the organics."

"What?" Gef looked around at Arthra who, sure enough, was developing spots. He brought her to a halt and turned around to find Wacamolo, Nicolle, and Rilla examining each other's skin, where also, spots were forming. He headed back to the second saddle and took Waca's arm. He stared at it closely. "More wires."

"Um, what do you mean *more* wires, Gef?" Wacamolo asked.

"Able," Gef said, squinting at the mist, "does it look like electrol to you?"

"Not really. Kind of. But also, look at our hands."

Gef looked at his own hands. There was a clear outline around his fingers, perhaps a few millimeters in thickness where the mist simply was not. He looked at Able, too. He looked at the mistakes Nip, Po and Ka'Rolly. Nip and Po had the same effect—a kind of field around them that the mist could not or would not cross. Ka'Rolly, as usual, was affected entirely differently. It's head was encased in mist, but it's body had the field effect.

Then, out of the mist, they all heard laughing, many voices, with a strange timbre, laughing. Blue eyes began to appear in the mist.

"We've got, company. Able, Rilla, time to hide." Gef bent and picked up Po, unsure as to even why.

"But," said Rilla.

"No," said Wacamolo sternly, "We discussed this. We said it was important you obey. Take Able and hide."

Able and Rilla made their way to their hideout, but Rilla still protested, "They're jut laughing."

Gef and Wacamolo and Nicolle stood and formed a triangle looking out into the mist. Nip came down and one of each of him came to light up in front of each of them.

"Well, that's nice," said Nicolle. "Still, I think we should just get moving?"

"I hear you. I think you might even be right, but let's just take a second."

"Come play with us," said several voices coming from the mist. And there was more laughing; not hearty laughing just quiet and playful.

"Sure," said Gef, "We like to play. Why don't you show yourselves so we can figure out a game?"

Crawling up onto Arthra—who shook and objected—came a number of differently sized creatures. They were all bipedal although they used there hands to knuckle-walk and then when they got to a spot they liked, they sat back on their hips. Gef noticed that several were already investigating the chest with Rilla and Able now in it. In fact, they were everywhere and getting into everything. "Come play," said one of the larger ones, two meters high, and it took Gif's hand gently, but its strength was abundantly clear, and it also did not really touch him, but was grabbing the field around him.

Gef laughed nervously with the cackling all around them now. "Sure, and what would you like to play?"

"Be like us!" The creature said and tugged on him. "You. Be like us!"

One of the smaller creatures, a gray metallic color like the mist, grabbed on to Nicolle's arm and clung to it. "No thank you," she said and shook it gently, then tried to pry it off. It just gradually lost its shape and began to encase her arm. Nip began to buzz orange and banged against the creature.

The larger creature that had a grip on Gef said, "See? They be like us. They come play with us. YOU. You be like us."

The creatures at the chest with Rilla and Able had opened and were leading Rilla and Able over to the rest of the crew, pairs of the creatures holding them by their arms. "Waca!" Rilla shouted. Their hands weren't just holding her arms but twisting and turning into cuffs, slowly stretching up along her arms.

"Okay! Okay!" said Gef to the biggest of the creatures. "You have to tell us the rules. If you want us to play with you—we'll play, but you have to tell us the rules."

"Be like us."

"Yes. Yes. I would like to. But I must know the rules and if you make my friends here like you, they won't be able to tell me the rules anymore and then I won't be able to play, and Able there—" Gef pointed, "He won't be Able to play. See? The ones you can't touch? We can't play without the rules."

This caused all of the chatter and laughing to cease to a dull hum. Wacamolo spoke up and said to Gef, "I believe I know the rules, Gef."

"Okay?"

"It's called catch," and Waca looked at Po who was in Gef's hand.

Gef looked at Po and then looked at the big creature. "We'll play with you. We'll teach you a game."

The moment that Gef threw Po—who blooped loudly—to Wacamolo, the synthetic simians became wildly distracted. They had not just let Wacamolo go in order to see the game played, even the mist that had collected on Wacamolo's skin came off and he too, like Able and Gef, now had a field around him. Wacamolo immediately tossed Po back to Gef (Po protested a little less this time) and Gef caught Po. He held Po close and whispered, "Some pretty lights might help here, little buddy." Po beeped in acknowledgement.

Gef tossed Po back to Wacamolo and in midair Po lit up several various colored birds that flew around him in circles. The creatures all but lost their minds. They let go of Nicolle and Rilla and Able, the particles of mist came off of them, and they all began jumping up and down shouting. Wacamolo caught Po and shrugged, "Sorry," he said to Po with a wince and tossed Po to one of the creatures.

In the meantime, Able had called the Nips to himself and told them fiercely, "It's time to fly! Get Waca and Nicolle and Rilla out of here. Fly them high!" The Nips obeyed and formed slings and flew over to the nomans. "Jump on!" shouted Able over the din of the creatures playing catch. "They'll get you out of here!"

"What about you, Able!" Rilla said, reaching out.

"We're fine for some reason. Get out of the mist. We'll be okay. We'll come find you."

"Hold on!" Shouted Nicolle and ran over to Ka'Rolly who had freed itself from its seatbelts, but whose head was still covered in the mist particles. Nicolle grabbed it and dragged it over to one of the Nips. "You're with me!" she said to it.

All of the nomans climbed into the swings of the Nips, with Nicolle holding Ka'Rolly who had folded its body into a smaller shape, like a suitcase, and no sooner had they grasped the swings, then they were whisked off into the sky above the mist.

"Nice job, Able!" shouted Gef. "That's one problem solved!" Gef looked out to the chaos of the synthetic simians, whose game of catch had entirely devolved into a game of chase, tackle and steal. Po, in a panic, was throwing out light models of dragons, mechanical tigers, even Vivian at one point, but all to no avail. The creatures just wanted to possess it. Able began to worry about his little creation. They might tear it apart.

The creatures continued to chase and tackle, but now many of them were smashing into each other and forming themselves into larger versions so that they could more easily wrestle Po free from one another. Even then, two more larger ones would mash together into yet a larger one. Some were four and five meters tall now; as easily as tall as Able and Gef standing on the back of Arthra. Gef had an idea, "Po!" He could barely keep track of the little ball among the giant wrestling creautures. "Let them mash into each other until there's just a few and then do your copy thing!" He turned to Able. "One of us has to get down there and grab him and one of us has to be ready to tell Arthra to book it. You're driving, got it?"

Able looked to Po and Gef put his hands on Able's shoulders. "I got him. Don't worry. Just get to the front of Able and soon as I say so, give her the single to run. Trust me, she's raring to go!"

Able took a deep breath. "Okay." And he began making his way to the steerage saddle.

Gef climbed down off Arthra and into the thromb of the four monsters left, each barely able to hold Po in their massive hands, but also unable to hide it for all its fireworks. He danced among their crashing feet, himself trying to keep track of Po. Two more of the creatures hugged each other into one larger massive creature and began prying at the smaller one's hand to get Po out. "Do it, Po! Do the thing!"

A bright light exploded from Po and it rippled across the two wrestling creatures who disintegrated into dust. As the dust fell across the floor of the automatic jungle, Gef ran to catch Po, huddle it to his body and ran for Arhtra. With two creatures left, running and reaching for him, Gef shouted to Able, "Go! Go! Go!" and jumped and with his free arm grabbed a belt attached to Arthra, who barreled off into the jungle immediately and at top speed.

The mist swirled around them, attempting to cling to Arthra but she was moving so fast and shaking and bucking that it couldn't see to get ahold. Behind them, the two creatures were howling and giving chase but could not keep up. Gef managed to pull himself and Po up into the third saddle and laid flat, clinging to both Po and the centipede.

Without warning, the world turned on its side as Arthra hit a cliff wall and ran ninety degrees upward from the ground, bursting out of the mist after a minute climbing higher and higher until again, the world turned another ninety degrees and they were level again and Arthra stopped dead in her tracks, flinging Gef and Po and Able to the ground in front of her. She shook her entire body in a massive convulsion, a ripple from one end to the other, flinging a large amount of gear off of herself and then stood still.

Gef set Po down and looked around. Able picked himself up and did the same. They found themselves on a dry plateau, far above the jungle. There in front of them were Wacamolo, Nicolle, and Rilla with their hands on their heads, surrounded by Dustmyn.