# Chapter 25

## The City of Kvet

Unfortunately, the plan was not to be of much use (at first) as the city was disturbingly empty.  As they came to the perimeter of it, it was remarkably quiet for a city. And more strange, was a structure that the crew had been able to see for miles back—a massive misshapen tower with holes all over it. As they moved through the low (very low) buildings in the city, It occurred to Nicolle that the architecture of the building did not match the main tower at all. Gef agreed and it gave him a bad feeling. He was fairly sure he had seen such a structure before, and it didn't belong here in the steppes of Hargala.

If the tower at the center of the city and the lack of commotion of any kind were not disturbing enough, there were the shadows that seemed to be moving all about in dark parts of the city. Gef and Able had adjusted their vision to primarily look for movement of any kind and whenever they passed a darkened archway or a shadowy alley, there was something—someone—waiting. "I don't like this," said Gef.

"I wouldn't normally council being brigands," said Wacamolo, "but I do think we should find what supplies we can and leave quickly."

"We can't do that," said Nicolle. "Besides, there could be people in trouble we could help."

Wacamolo argued, "Yes. That could very well be us."

But the argument was moot. The crew had traveled a dozen blocks in to the city when out of the shadows stepped ten or so tall insectoid creatures. They had large spherical eyes covered in tiles, stood on two legs and had four arms, in which they carried multiple nasty looking spears and axes. Get recognized them as chimexapods, and just as suddenly knew that the tower in the center of Kvet wasn't a tower, but a hive.

"This makes no sense," said Gef to Wacamolo. "These chimexapods shouldn't be here."

"Tell them," said Wacamolo.

The children had been stowed away in their secret chest, guarded by Ka'Rolly, but still they peered out a crack in the lid to watch what was happening, their eyes wide at seeing such alien creatures.

Several of the chimexapods raised various arms, with their pincer hands in a position clearly meaning "halt." They spoke in loud chuffs and chittering. No one on board Arthra could understand a word, but then, it seemed they didn't have to as Arthra herself sounded like she was speaking.

"Um, I didn't know Arthra could talk," said Nicolle.

A the same time, Gef and Wacamolo spoke, "Neither did we."

"Can anyone understand what she is saying?" Asked Nicolle.

"Bits and pieces," said Gef. "They're definitely asking what she's doing here and they seem to want to know what her cargo is."

"Ha! I never," said Wacamolo.

Most of the chimexapods lined up in front of Arthra as two took hold of her reigns and jerked them away from the saddle and Gef. "Okay. Wait a minute," said Gef. The column of soldiers began leading Arthra down the street, toward the center of town.

"Is Arthra going along with this?" Asked Wacamolo.

"I can't tell, but I'm going to have my say in the matter." Gef hopped down of the saddle to the street, strode at a fast clip past all the soldiers to the front of the group where they immediately brandished all of their angular and toothy weapons. Gef held his hands up in a gesture of peace and spoke a few sputtering clicks that he hoped meant "Hold" and "Peace".

The soldiers looked at one another but other than that had no immediate response. Gef looked to Arthra and said, "Tell them we don't want to stay, Arthra. Please."

Arthra made several noises and the soldiers turned to listen to her but then turned back to Gef and one of the chimexapods closest to him shook its head. Gef thought to himself that this was going nowhere so he shouted back to the crew, "Nip! Bring me Po, will ya'?"

The chimexapods raised their weapons to the air as all the parts of Nip dutifully carried Po over to Gef and dropped it in his hands. Once delivered, Nip began hovering among the chimexapods, investigating, but possibly taunting them. When one of the chimexapods took a swing at part of Nip, it hovered far above in the air and made a "blat" sound.

"Po, I'm hoping you can help me make them understand me."

Po shivered an then cast a glowing light all around Gef that shaped itself into the form of a chimexapod surrounding Gef's own body, like a suit of armor made of light. The chimexapods were clearly stunned and backed up. Now, as Gef spoke, a string of chimexapodian sounds came from the light sculpture. "[We mean you no harm but we do not wish to go with you without more explanation]."

Again, the chimexapod closest to Gef spoke, but this time Gef understood it clearly. "[You will come to hive to see queen. Sentence for trespassing is food.]"

Gef wasn't sure what to make of the last part, but he knew well that people who entered chimexapod hives tended not to leave or be heard from ever again.

"[We will stay here. Your queen can come see us. Or, we can leave and stop trespassing. We thought this was a city of the Dustmyn."]

"[Queen does not leave hive. Dustmyn all gone. You will cease speaking and come with us.]"

Gef looked to Arthra's saddle where Wacamolo and Nicolle were straining on their hands and knees to see what was going on. This was not good. The chimexapods were large—the shortest was still a half a meter teller than Gef—and they were armed and dangerous and there were a million re-enforcements waiting in the hive. Still, before Gef could strategize further, the chimexapod nearest him raised its voice and said, "[Cease this sacrilegious science!]" and grabbed Po out of Gef's hand.

Gef froze. That did it. Things were literally out of his hands now. The Nips swooped into action in a maddening display of chirps, sirens, and lights. Po immediately interacted with the chimexapod, likely draining it of any memories and causing it to fall to the ground in a pile. The other chimexapods immediately sprang into action, taking swings at both Nip and Gef, al of whom managed to dodge. Wacamolo and Nicolle had stood and were ready to join in the fray.

Then something even stranger happened. The chimexapods were, without warning or even sound, dismembered. Their arms came off their bodies. Their legs were cut and caused them to fall over. All of this caused them to emit high pitched sounds screeches indicating pain or cries for help. Gef turned to the hive. There were already groups of chimexapods flying over the low the buildings of the city in groups, but also there was smoke beginning to emanate from the holes in the hive tower. Only Gef knew it wasn't smoke. The distance made it look like that. It was many, many more chimexapods.

"Curse Enubys," said gef. He made to run back to Arthra. Whatever was happening, it would allow for a hasty retreat, but even as he stepped to run, from out of thin air, a dustmyn appeared!

The dustmyn held his hand out, "You and your friends must come with me if you are to survive, Daemon!"

That word, daemon, shocked Gef. He'd not heard it in a hundred years or more. It was more than enough for him to shout to the crew that they were moving. Picking Arthra's reign from up off the ground, he turned to the Dustmyn, "Lead the way!"

They began running down a side street as more Dustmyn seemingly appeared from out of nowhere. The chimexapods that had confronted them were entirely destroyed. Gef regretted the violence, but he also felt he'd had no choice. Luckily, Ka'Rolly had sealed the chest with Rilla and Able in it, and kept them from looking, so there was the small victory that the children had not seen the fight.

After moving down a maze of side streets and alleyways, with chimexapods buzzing overhead, the whole crowd of the crew and dustmyn came to a kind of warehouse with a hole in its side. "In here!" said the dustmyn. Gef turned to the crew, "Everyone follow—" he turned to the Dustmyn. "Name?"

"I am Alaharih."

"Okay, crew, everyone follow Alaharih here."

As the crew dismounted and ducked to get in the small hole, Wacamolo asked Gef, "What about Arthra?"

"I'll stay with her. We'll find another way to wherever this is going."

"No!" Shouted Alaharih above the buzzing. "Your companions are of no matter to me, daemon. We need you!"

"I'm not leaving Arhtra behind."

"She will be fine. The chimex worship creatures like her."

Gef turned to Arthra and put his hand on her face. Then, he realized, "Po!" The Nips had already retrieved Po and again brought it to Gef. "Help me speak to Arthra."

The others had made their way into the tunnel. The Dustmyn had strange orbs that glowed and lit the small room. In it their was a single set of stairs. Alhirah told the crew. "Please. I must wait for your master. Follow my men down into the city."

Nicolle and Wacamolo scoffed at the word master, but there was no time to debate. The noise outside the building had grown to a hurricane wind. Rilla and Able were mesmorized by the sound and the sounds of chimaexapods and dustmyn fighting. Nicolle saw this and gathered them up. "Come, children. We have to go!" The crew made their way down the stairs into the depths with the dustmyn.



