# Chapter 28

## To War?

	The crew was gathered in their townhouse in a rough semi-circle of pillows and chairs around the convector in the main room. The tunnels could grow very cold at night, especially given the depth, and so the Dustmyn had created an ingenious method of piping warm air throughout the city with tubes that curved around and in on themselves to create a large amount of surface area. The main rooms of most of the houses of Kvet had large, knotted structures, called convectors, created out of these tubes and unique to each household. The metal tubes themselves were covered in etchings that often described the history of the family. This townhouse had recently been renovated and so the convector yet had any etchings. Rilla and Able, with Wacamolo's help, had begun sketching out some drawings of the crew that they eventually wanted to put on the convector. The crew was joined by Xistra and Alharih and the new Nip.

Alharih was speaking. "There is a main tunnel from here down out of the steppes to a small Dustmyn village on the Silt Sea shore called Siltstone. We can get you passage from there on a ship to the north shore of the sea. It likely won't be a comfortable ship, but I know a captain that I greatly trust to look after you."

Wacamolo had Remory's Guide laid out in front of him. "Gef, I know our ultimate goal is the Ultracircus, but I wonder if we shouldn't try to stop a the city of Sultana Nur Waya? It's a city on an island in the Silt Sea."

Both Xistra and Alharih chuckled. Xistra spoke, "That's not an island, my friend. And You may have a very hard time indeed finding it."

The crew looked on with curiosity. Alharih jumped in, "It's not an island, it's a giant turtle. There is a city on its back, yes, but it doesn't stay in the same place, moving with the seasons."

"A turtle big enough for a city?" exclaimed Able. "Is there only one or are there others?"

Xistra answered, "There are legends of other turtles; some say they swim beneath the silt for decades at a time."

"Is it a Dustmyn city?" Asked Gef.

Alharih said, "No. It's a Krunmyn city. They also live mostly along the north shore. We are on decent terms with them. It was to their city of Ulaf that I intended to send you. From there you could travel north into Aaramyn lands or wherever your Texo Compass sends you. I don't know much about the North shore. I've only been twice."

"I've never been," said Xistra.

Nicolle spoke, "You are welcome to come with us, Xistra."

Xistra looked shocked and then looked at Alharih, who replied, "Don't look at me, little cousin. Everyone knows you're your own woman."

Xistra thought hard, staring at the convector. "Yes, then. I should like to go with you when this is all done."

Nicolle clapped. "It will be great to have more hands and brains!"

"And I want you to show me how you duplicated Nip, too!" said Able.

"I'll have to pack!" said Xistra. After a moment she said, with some concern "I've never had to do that before."

Wacamolo, still staring at Remory's guide, muttered, "A city on the move. How fantastic."

* * *

The day came that Alharih, Xistra, Gef, Wacamolo and many representatives of Dustmyn enclaves met at Kvet with reports on the tunnel. Valves had been installed to control the flow of the Gray Goo. Doors of all sorts had been created to enter and exit the tunnel, their seals and gaskets double and triple checked.

Gef had emphasized, maybe a hundred times, the gray goo could not be allowed outside the tunnel. It would consume any creature it encountered. They must release a controlled cluster, bait it and steer it toward the hive. Once it was in the final chamber beneath the hive, there were blast charges that could be set off that would sever the final wall between the tunnel, the Goo and the hive. At that point, there would be no turning back.

Gef made sure that Alharih had all of the necessary triggers and even a code to set off the final blast. Alharih had given a dust oath and a lock of his hair to Gef, swearing not to set off the charges until he knew for certain that Gef's negotiations had failed. There would be a chain of guards from outside the hive, down one of the escape tunnels to the very meeting room they were standing in.

Should anyone on the surface see the Texo Compass laser fire from the top of the hive, or anywhere near it, the charges were to be set off, the Goo released. The chamber would then be sealed again by forty or so Dustmyn who would raise a steel platform up to the hole in the chamber and seal it shut again. Nicolle and Xistra would be stationed near the hive with several Dustmyn scouts. Once the chimexapods were forced to flee, it would be their job to seal up lower entrances to the hive. The Dustmyn had supplied them with mobile plaster pumps that they usually used to seal walls underground.

But Gef neither thought the plan was foolproof nor did he think it would be necessary. He had spent days talking to leaders from Kvet and other enclaves telling them that co-existence may be a necessity. The chimexapods, to his knowledge, had never ventured beyond their homelands en masse. Scouts were known to travel out, but no more. Something might be occurring causing their invasion. He promised the Dustmyn to get to the bottom of it and to end the hostilities, but he couldn't promise that the chimexapods would leave.

There was a great deal of debate and consternation about this last point, but in the end the Dustmyn leaders agreed to wait and see what the caretaker could discover. The weapon was ready; there was no need to rush to use it.

So with those preparations, Gef, Able, Po, Nip and Ka'Rolly with Arthra in tow, set off for the surface and the chimexapod hive. 

* * *

It didn't take long at all for the diplomatic group to be noticed once they were on the surface. The chimexapod warriors that located and surrounded them, declared, "You are not food." And without much more fanfare, the six of them were hauled on insectoid wings high up into the caverns of the hive where they were to meet the queen.

The queen's chamber was a large room with her being the largest thing in it. From the inside, the construction of the hive became readily more apparent, nothing more than wet mud plastered into place. It was simply the sheer number of the chimexapods that had allowed them to construct it so fast. The walls were covered in drones that scanned their area and took out handfuls of dirt, chewed it, spit it out and repaired gaps. Even as the queen presented herself to the Gef and Able and the others, the work and buzzing never ceased. Gef felt like they were having a meeting in a construction site. The queen herself, a vast creature three times as large as even Arthra, had drones all over her, attending to her.

Once again, Gef asked Po to create the light sculpture of the chimexapod body over him and also Able. The two of them, in this form, stepped in front of the queen and both knelt to one knee. "[Your majesty, I am Gef, daemon of the caretakers and I humbly request your audience.]"

"[Caretaker? I think not. You may rise, but do not think you are in alliance with us any longer.]"

"[I see. And might I ask why this change in status has occurred?]"

"[Your experiments at the inverted mountain have all but destroyed out lands. For thousands of years we had been content to live in our jungles. At first, your experiments shrank and reduced our precious flowers. Then, it destroyed them. We tried to cultivate them artificially, our greatest scientist, KlckClck, attempting to construct factories for them. But then the nanosphere began to turn against us. Even gravity now fails in many parts of our country.]"

"[Your majesty, I have not been to your part of the world in a hundred years, if not longer. I assure you, I do not know of such an experiment, it's purpose, or who is responsible. I am merely here to represent the people of the steppes of Cargo, known by many as the Dustmyn. They are certainly not responsible for what has happened to your lands, and yet you have taken their capital city by force.]"

Around the arch over the queen's head were several chimexapods who were molting and gray. They spoke to the queen in hushed tones, their eyes milky white. *Advisors* thought Gef.

"[These Dustmyn murdered our ambassador.]"

"[But when so few people speak—or even can speak—your language, how can you be sure it was not a misunderstanding? Perhaps it was self-defense.]"

"[They do not even deign to attend us with you!]"

"[On two occasions now we have been informed that we are not food, but that our compatriots, Dustmyn and Nomex alike, are food*. Can you not see the intrinsic threat in this kind of talk?]"

"[They are destroying our great hives, our gardens, our ways! Therefore, they shall be food!]"

"[Very well, your majesty. I must tell you I come here today with both a promise and a threat. I promise peace between you and the peoples of the steppes should your army agree to stand down and negotiate. Should you not, I have gathered a mass of this beneath your hive.]"

With that, Gef produced a device made of two large glass chambers, similar to the grub lamps of the Dustmyn, with a tube with a valve in between them. In one chamber was the glowing grubs; in the other, a sample of the swirling charcoal gray mass of the goo. "[This is a mutated version of the nanosphere that converts all it comes in to contact with into itself. It constructs nothing, it gives nothing. It is all-consuming and it does so at a remarkable rate.]" He opened the door between the chambers and within moments the Goo began devouring the grubs.

A high-pitched screeching engulfed the room. The queen could not shout over the din, but she strained herself to lean forward and reach for the device to stop the goo from devouring the grubs.

Gef held up his hand in a stopping gesture. He could raise his voice above the noise—amplify it even. "There is no stopping it once it has begun. It devours everything in its way and I have a massive quantity of it, now trapped beneath this hive. With a signal gesture, I can release it."

The grubs vanished. The grey goo had doubled in size and was busy sloshing from one chamber to the next, back and forth like an impatient hourglass. The chamber grew quiet. Able felt he could sense a sadness in the room. Whereas the grubs were tools that the Dustmyn used, to the Chimexapods, they were brethren. "Please!" he shouted and stepped forward. "Please cooperate with us." He gestured to Ka'Rolly, "Look at what we can *create*! When we work together, we can make great new things. Maybe we can even save your gardens. We seek the Ultracircus; we even know where it is! Surely, with such a device we could help you."

Gef smiled. Alharih had asked after the wisdom of bringing a child to such a serious negotiation.

The queen conferred with her council for some time, the chamber remaining quiet now. Able looked to Gef, who simply closed his eyes and nodded with confidence.

"What would you have us do?" asked the queen now. "We cannot go home. We have used a great many resources to even get here."

"All we ask is that you allow the Dustmyn to come before you and negotiate terms by which you can both live together. It will be difficult, but it can be done."
