# Canto 8

## In which [Able](/wiki/able-summary) climbs the mesa one last time and throws himself off into the wilds, leaving behind a useful entity.

Able sits outside the house at the bottom of the wall to his mother's room for a long time. Resting his head against the ashen wood he tries to hear the sound of her machines over the wind and he shivers. But finally, after nodding off several times, he stands and walks along the foot of the mesa out behind the house. There, amongst large stones and columns, he find a cave and crawls into it to wait for the dawn. Housed in the small dark chamber, he releases his mistakes from their cotton home and fusses with them for some time, taking apart the non-functioning ones and repairing (as best he can) the injured ones, before curling up in a ball on the cave floor, the green buzzing, still housed in its wooden box, sitting by his head. It's green light whirs, desperate to reach the top of the mesa, and it shines through the seams in the box, it's glow falling on the tears running down on Able's sleeping face.

* * *

Able awakens cold and confused, but it does not take long for him to gather himself and his mistakes and head out into the world. Once out of the cave, the dim sunlight warms him slightly, and he takes no time releasing the green buzzing and holding on tight as it hovers him up to the top of the mesa where he can then decide where to go. Once there, he seats himself on the edge of the mesa and looks out across the world. There is very little indication of where to go, but one thing catches his eye. Just near the skeletal claw of the (only) tree in the distance he can see a figure; someone on their hands and knees and... digging? Able can't be sure, but it grabs his curiosity and he decides to find this person.

Once again, he opens his pillowcase and his mistakes pile out, two of the rollys ambling over to the green buzzing and bumping it several times, appearing almost curious. Still humming its merry anthem to being on top of the mesa, the buzzing floats up higher, out of reach of the spherical nuisances while emitting a second tone of dissonance. Able is irritated by the noise and shoots a glance at the buzzing--"You stop that."  The buzzing, still humming, also peeps twice in compliance and continues humming a little more quietly now. "And you two leave her alone." The rollys move away from the center of the mesa and proceed to try to roll up on top of one another.

Able removes the carcass of one of his mistakes from the pillowcase, and cradles it to his breast, a spiny mess of nothing but tiny translucent paper wings, all bent out of shape and torn now. Once, it had flown beautifully, all the while shimmering with only the noise of rustling paper.  It was as light as air, and more than once had hurled itself into his head in the manner of a prank or sometimes a cry for attention.  But it was crushed by his brute of a brother now and he began disassembling it and laying the wings out on the ground in front him. Once they are all laid out, he sets the center of the mistake aside and began kneading the wings into one oblong rounded rectangle of silken translucent webbing. He calls a rolly over and proceeds to attach the corners of the rectangle of webbing to the little rolly, who, sensing what Able has in mind perhaps, grows four small scaly clawed extensions for each corner of the cloth. Once attached, the cloth turns a delightful gold, the color spilling out from the center and pouring onto the rolly's new appendages. In fact, the rolly now no longer resembles its pair but, rather a large ring. As the gold touched its claws, it had flattened and hollowed itself out with a loud burp.

Holding the ring aloft, Able watches as the new--well, what would he call it?—*fling* began to fill itself with wind tug at this hands. He takes a small jump and it pulls him up into the air and then drifts slowly down--dangerously close to the edge of the mesa. Able lands and catches his balance. He folds the fling's cape so that it won't yet catch the wind and herds his other mistakes into the pillowcase again. Stubbornly, the green buzzing ignores him. "Well," Able says at first. "I suppose there might be other mesas..." though he had no idea if this is the case, nor if that's what the little mistake liked in the first place. Still, the little buzzing does not move from its spot at the center of the top of the mesa. "All right then, I suppose I won't need to get to the top of this mesa again anyway. Take care of yourself." And with that he throws the gold fling into the wind and clings to its ring as he jumps off the mesa and drifts down toward the desert floor like a leaf—if anyone remembered what those were anymore.

Many minutes later, from the top of the mesa, Able was little more than a shadow beneath a large glimmering golden circle that, with a puff of dust from the desert floor, landed.  The green buzzing rose to a height above the mesa and turned a brighter green. Then it floated back and forth from the center of the mesa to the edge and back, and continued to do so faster and faster until it became a thick green line tugging at the center of the mesa and pointing toward Able, the delightful humming replaced now with a low vibration of impatience.