---
title: Prologue
taxonomy:
    category: prologue
---

# Prologue

It is without question melodramatic to open this text by telling you not to read it. This text has made it into your hands and so I suspect you will read at least some of it. Still, it is worth cautioning you that the stories and legends mentioned here are largely put to rest, and should remain that way. I myself had too little understanding of the machinations of the theories and ideas presented here. What I possessed was only enough knowledge to be terribly dangerous; in fact, deadly. If I'd had more time to explore these ideas, I might have more fully understood what I was unleashing, and I might have seen the danger that these ideas posed to my family.

As it stands, now six months beyond the events described herein, I want nothing more to do with the information. I prefer to forever remain in doubt as to whether I tapped into something greater than my understanding, or a greater consciousness, or if the whole matter was fiction and that I myself have a delusional and dark side that I cannot comprehend. It is Spring now and the events that occurred in November feel solidly behind me—though not, I suspect, for Agent Cobb. Even now, on some street corner somewhere, I think I see a black nondescript government car through the windshield of which I think I glance her face. I cannot believe that she has let the matter go—that she will ever let the matter go. She certainly will never believe my explanation of events, but the evidence and the facts are what they are, and I think she will ultimately have to let the case rest, unsolved.

If I'm frank, there have been plenty of days when I, myself, do not believe in the events as I witnessed them. I certainly have good reason not to believe my own perceptions during the last hours of this horrendous affair. There is a great deal to doubt about the history and reality of Reza Bahadir and his nemesis Rausch. Paranoia and perhaps mental illness—a psychotic break—certainly enters into the equation. But all I can say about everything that occurred is that the further away I am from what happened, the better and more sound that I feel. Dreams should die when we awaken. I don't sleep well though. I have not slept through the night since November. Always I am in bed and in the corner of the bedroom, just past some shaft of moonlight, there is some shadow that lingers, moving to block the light. Then I awaken. It has become my custom to check the house, the doors, the locks, the windows, and then return to bed, wondering about what hand was moving in the shadows. I know it. I know it is the skeletal and dead hand of an ancient necromancer. It is one who never dies because he infests my dreams. He claims he is me. I know this not to be true, but he won't stop. I've let him into my house because I know his name.

All this is to impart on you that whatever you read here, whatever you take away, do not seek it out. Look for no more information about the things mentioned in this book than this book itself. What you will seek out will not be what you find in the end, and what you find in the end is a thing, a shadow, a demon, that you will regret having let into your life; even if you just think about it too much.