---
title: The Great Teacher
created: 2025-01-14
categories: mind, zen, grit, persistence
---

## The Great Teacher

### Possessing Grit

Gudo was the emperor’s teacher of his time. Nevertheless, he used to travel alone as a wandering mendicant. Once when he was on his way to Edo, the cultural and political center of the shogunate, he approached a little village named Takenaka. It was evening and a heavy rain was falling. Gudo was thoroughly wet. His straw sandals were in pieces. At a farmhouse near the village, he noticed four or five pairs of sandals in the window and decided to buy some dry ones.

The woman who offered him the sandals, seeing how wet he was, invited him in to remain for the night in her home. Gudo accepted, thanking her. He entered and recited a sutra before the family shrine. He was then introduced to the women’s mother, and to her children. Observing that the entire family was depressed, Gudo asked what was wrong.

“My husband is a gambler and a drunkard,” the housewife told him. “When he happens to win he drinks and becomes abusive. When he loses he borrows money from others. Sometimes when he becomes thoroughly drunk he does not come home at all. What can I do?”

“I will help him,” said Gudo. “Here is some money. Get me a gallon of fine wine and something good to eat. Then you may retire. I will meditate before the shrine.”

When the man of the house returned about midnight, quite drunk, he bellowed: “Hey, wife, I am home. Have you something for me to eat?”

“I have something for you,” said Gudo. “I happened to be caught in the rain and your wife kindly asked me to remain here for the night. In return I have bought some wine and fish, so you might as well have them.”

The man was delighted. He drank the wine at once and laid himself down on the floor. Gudo sat in meditation beside him.

In the morning when the husband awoke he had forgotten about the previous night. “Who are you? Where do you come from?” he asked Gudo, who was still meditating.

“I am Gudo of Kyoto and I am going on to Edo,” replied the Zen master.

The man was utterly ashamed. He apologized profusely to the teacher of his Emperor.

Gudo smiled. “Everything in this life is impermanent,” he explained. “Life is very brief. If you keep on gambling and drinking, you will have no time left to accomplish anything else, and you will cause your family to suffer too.”

The perception of the husband awoke as if from a dream. “You are right,” he declared. “How can I ever repay you for this wonderful teaching! Let me see you off and carry your things a little way.”

“If you wish,” assented Gudo.

The two started out. After they had gone three miles Gudo told him to return. “Just another five miles,” he begged Gudo. They continued on.

“You may return now,” suggested Gudo.

“After another ten miles,” the man replied.

“Return now,” said Gudo, when the ten miles had been passed.

“I am going to follow you all the rest of my life,” declared the man.

Modern Zen teachings in Japan spring from the lineage of a famous master who was the successor of Gudo. His name was Mu-nan, the man who never turned back.

* * *

When we decide to take the path of recovery we should avail ourselves of two things: the wisdom available and discovering our grit. Gudo here, is the wisdom and the shopkeeper’s husband seeks wisdom with grit, which we can define as perseverance of recovery, the great Gudo is the wisdom generated from recovery programs, testimonials from those who have suffered from the same affliction, as well as reports of success from those ahead of us on the path. We may not even understand much of the wisdom that comes or way and to that end it is useful to possess grit.

Recovery is a practice, like learning to play piano or mastering a sport. To improve a practice, one must practice. To truly advance, we should practice every day. To thus end, we need grit, or the passion to pursue our practice in the long-term, even when there is no end in sight. With grit, we can follow the wisdom where it takes us and not turn back.

While some who read this may see a man that is a failure for leaving his family, the truth of addiction is that if left unchecked he would have lost them anyway and hurt them greatly in the process. They are liable to be happy without him as he was. The path to recovery sometimes has to be about oneself. At times we may have to leave people behind—even ones we love—because we have hurt them and they deserve peace. Some people we must leave because they may tempt us back to our addiction.

Finally, the shopkeeper’s husband also carries the belongings of the teacher. This speaks to being of service while in recovery. Often times we feel the shame the man felt in front of Gudo. We can make ourselves whole again and heal the pain of shame by being of service to others. When passion feels our grit, we may even find pleasure in good work, both because it will feel like progress and it will refill our reservoir of pride.