# ChatGPT and Cognitive Bias  

## ChatGPT has been a boon of productivity for many, but many experts warn of its shortcomings. They say it can "hallucinate" and be horribly wrong when it comes to "humanness." While this remains true, many experts fail to draw parallels to human thinking. Humans hallucinate, have false memories, and possess cognitive biases. Out conversation should now center on, how can we use AI to help us overcome our shortcomings in reasoning, and how are we able to benefit AI with our particular brand of knowledge?

You might say that human beings are not rational and that the advantage of working with AI is that computers are rational. However, depending on your definition of rational, you could be wrong on both counts. Human beings are highly rational for the environment we evolutionarily adapted to. We are capable of quick decisions based on very little information, and that's handy when deciding if there's a tiger in those bushes. When it comes to creating a year-long project plan for a new home, not so much.

Modern AI can pass an IQ test or the Bar, but fail to understand that the long jump in track and field is performed by only one person at a time or that [JWST did not take the first photograph of an exoplanet](https://www.businessinsider.com/google-ad-ai-chatgpt-rival-bard-gives-inaccurate-answer-2023-2) (despite Google's advertising to the contrary).

Human "irrationality" is often framed in terms of cognitive bias. There are ways that humans think naturally that can lead them to poor conclusions. Some examples include confirmation bias, framing effects, or the false consensus effect. In order to reason quickly about situations, humans use heuristics or mental shortcuts which in certain scenarios can lead to correct conclusions and wildly incorrect conclusions in alternate scenarios. Confirmation bias comes about when we reason about  a conclusion given only the evidence that we have collected and discard evidence that is contrary to what we believe. Framing effects occur because we change a calculation based on the emotional content of the problem. And the false consensus bias comes about when we believe that more people hold the same opinion than actually do. These biases have their advantages but should also be guarded against.