{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1187\cocoasubrtf390
\cocoascreenfonts1{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 LucidaGrande;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\sl312\slmult1\pardirnatural\qj

\f0\fs26 \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
### Canto 19\
\pard\pardeftab720\fi1089\sl312\slmult1\pardirnatural\qj
\cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl312\slmult1\pardirnatural\qj
\cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
#### In which our little maker of mistakes, Able, finds himself very alone in a very large world\'97save the little companions he has made.\
\pard\pardeftab720\fi1089\sl312\slmult1\pardirnatural\qj
\cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
Able is woken early in the morning by the rising sun. The black of night gives way to the gray of day. He lies on his side on his bedroll and looks around the small encampment.  The fire he made the previous night, thanks to the new mistake, the flamehat, is burned out and in its place is a small circle of black ashes in the sand.  The morning is still cold, but Able is grateful to know that in a few hours, the desert will be warm again.  He digs through his rucksack to get out some rations that he still has, crunchy wheat stuff mashed together with a bland molasses of some kind. He sits on his bedroll and eats while the his mistakes circle about on the desert ground, one of them investigating the circle of black ash.\
\
Curiously, he does not see the flamehat.  He digs through his rucksack again and finds a rolly that is now covered in yellow and orange patterns with a single light near one of its eyes that is blinking intermittently with red and orange. It's warm to the touch. "Are you Flamehat?" he asks it. The little rolly sounds out three trill beeps.\
\
"Oh." He turns the rolly over and over in his hands and sees a switch. "Why did you go back to being a rolly?" He presses the switch, and the top half of the rolly pops open and the small smokestacks he remembers from the night before pop out. Able presses a button that appears now next to the switch and the bottom half of the rolly turns and then compresses into itself, giving the appearance of the flamehat again. "Huh. I guess you can go back and forth then. That's new." He examines the little flamehat a bit more and sees a square orange button, which he presses. The bottom of the rolly pops back out, the smokestacks fold inside, and the little mistake is once again a rolly covered in orange and yellow patches. "Neat!"\
\
Able looks to the buzzing which had been hovering behind his shoulder, "Can you do that?" The buzzing, now green, flashes brightly, chimes, and then folds in on itself and drops to the ground, once again a spherical little rolly mistake with crisscrossing green and red stripes. "Cool!" He picks up both rollys and holds them in front of him. "I didn't know you all could do that. I wonder if that will come in handy?" Setting them down in the sand, he says, "Well, be whatever way you want, I guess." The flamehat rolly boops but stays the same while the buzzing rolly immediately changes back into a hovering plate with a light shape and hovers around Able's head. Able puzzles over this as he gathers up his things and rolls up his bedroll for carrying.\
\
Finally, with all of his things packed up, he sits and contemplates what direction to go. If he knew anything at all about the Ultracircus, he would just make a rolly to lead him there, but as it is, he doesn't know the first thing about what an ultracircus looks like, or frankly, even what it is.  Before he and Cal met up with Gef, it seemed like they were mostly heading away form the Sun, though, so Able figures it couldn't hurt to keep going in that direction, though he doesn't want to cross their path. And this thought makes him glum, because truth be told he wouldn't mind seeing Cal again. He gets up to go, most of the rollys in his rucksack, his bedroll tied and slung over his shoulder, the buzzing, now green, hovering around him. The Dustfish, until now, had been swimming on the far side of camp and Able whistles for it and it dutifully swims to him. When it approaches him, he says, "We're going to need water, huh?"\
\
Able wanders through the scruff, away from the Sun as best he can. There are no paths now, and so the walking is difficult. In many places he has to push his way through thick brambles and branches, but after a few hours, he steps out of the bushes into what appears to be a sandy path. Looking up and down the path, which looks more like a hallway because of the thick, tall scruff on either side, he can see that the path neither heads away from or toward the sun.  He turns to the Dustfish, "What do you think?"\
\
The Dustfish swims up the path a little ways and then turns and swims back along the path to Able, then past him and a little ways up the path the other direction. Finally, the Dustfish turns to Able and waits until he is looking. It swims in a circle three times and then points down the path. "Ok," Able says. "It looks like we go that way." They begin heading down the path, and now that some sort of direction is easily discernible, the buzzing zips off ahead on the path, perhaps to scout things out.\
\
The path winds on for some time and at one point Able wishes that he had something like a pede or a giant lizard to ride on.  Given his lame leg, the walking is very hard. He concentrates and tries to think about what an Ultracircus might looks like.  His first thought is that it might be a giant house of some sort. "Ultra" sounded to him like something that might have lights or stars. And, of course, the old crone had told him that there would be lots of color, so he tried to imagine that, too: a whole building covered in colors. It was hard to imagine that much color.  Then again, maybe Ultracircus was just a name for something, something like the Dustfish; a giant animal of some kind. He pictures a centipede that was big enough to have a village on it. That would be very strange and very ultra-y. And if it was covered in colors to boot--that would be amazing!\
\
For some time now the walking had been getting harder as the dry, solid ground of the scruff gave way to loose sand. The scruff had become shorter and the path was leading upwards.  The uphill climb with the loose sand was making moving forward tough and Able decides that once he gets to the top of the next hill, that will be a good place to take a break. He looks up and sees that the sun has risen and is now past him. Thinking about the Ultracircus must have really distracted him, because it seems as though a lot of time had passed, but he hasn't been paying too much attention to the walking.\
\
Up ahead, a hundred yards or so, both the buzzing and the dustfish had  already crested the hill and are hovering and waiting for Able. Relieved, Able trudges on, the sand getting thicker, knowing that there is not much further to go before he can rest for a bit. As he also comes to the crest of the hill, the scruff gets much shorter, so short now, that in places he can see over it. Facing the direction the path is heading, he can turn to his left and see that there are huge hills of gray sand (and huge valleys) sitting down below him.  The scruff is mostly to his right and at one point, when he turns around on the path, he can see a great deal of the scruff forest stretching out back the way he had come. The two wildernesses, the dunes and the scruffs, looks so different from one another, and yet both of them are hiding many things from Able.\
\
When he reaches the top of the hill, breathing heavy now, he sets his things down and looks around. "Wow." The path ahead of them continues downhill, with the scruff forest on the right and on the left, the giant hills and valleys of sand, and... something else.  He cocks his head to one side and squints. Down the hill a ways, maybe ten feet from the path are what appear to be giant letters sitting upright in the sands. They are boxy, but there appear to be many different kinds of them, maybe fifty or so in all, standing in a line that runs along the edge of the sands and the path.\
\
Able seats himself on the hilltop and spends some time looking. From the top of the little hill he can even see past the big sea of sand to what look like giant mountains of charcoal, the same color as the remnants from his fire that morning. He can see far in every direction, but then it strikes him that he cannot see any*one*. The view is beautiful, with sea sands and scruff forest and charcoal mountains, but for the first time, it settles on Able that he is very alone. Well (he look at the dustfish) not *alone*. But yes, he is very alone, and the world feels like a very unwelcome place.}