# Being a Bridge

Anthony was a man who not only brought people together, but also somehow showed them their unknown unity, commonality—whatever you call it, he had an ability to make anyone from any road of travel engage. He was a solvent and a duct tape and a glue—constantly chipper—though that is a word too “uncool” for him. Still, anywhere he went, there was unbridled joy and the bet that something exciting would happen. He once said—when a compatriot discovered that he was going on Spring Break in Cancun at the age of twenty-four—that he was *very good* at Spring Break. Those who know him still have no doubts about that fact today, some decades later. Anthony was indeed very good at Spring Break.

The apartment he originally lived in was near the Queensborough bridge and the tram would glide by, cutting out the sunlight. Stoned, one would think that the Sun had cut out and that there was a real reason for panic, but the panic would subside as the tram went by and the sunlight returned. This was summer in New York City and so there was sunlight. You could get not he roof of that apartment building, near the tram and the bridge and watch the whole of the business of midtown just work below you, right from Lexington over to the Hudson—an unusual sight. Especially these days.

When Anthony used to order pot, he’s do it by calling a phone number—the number of a guy named “chicken”. Chicken would show up near the artment building in a van and Anthony would jump in, make the transaction and jump out again. Well, one time that didn[t work out. The Police were following the Chicken van and they arrested everyone who came out of it. Those were the days—pot illegal! Anthony moved on of course; paid the fine, but he said the worst thing wasn’t jail or the fine; it was sitting in that van watching other poeple get caught. That was just no good. He wanted to shout. He wanted to warn them all about the irritation that was coming. When the NYPD caught them all, were they going to stop smoking pot: fuck no.
But gather them up they did.
