---
title: Session 1
taxonomy:
    category: docs
process:
	twig: true
---

Where do I even start? I don't know how the hell to write a book. I've never had any desire to do it—despite being an English professor. I love books, I love to read but the idea of writing anything longer than a paper has always seemed ludicrous to me. It seems like it drives authors crazy. And to do it in thirty-one days! This is insane, but given the circumstances as they stand now, I don't know what else to do other than to sit here and write because that's what he wants—demands—and shit—if he got into the house, maybe he's even watching me right now.

There was no sign of any forced entry into the house that I could see. I saw no signs of any kind of struggle. I just pulled into the driveway and saw the front door wide open. I got a sinking feeling in my gut right away, but I put it aside and assumed that... why doesn't he want me to explain this part? In his demands, I mean, among other things he demanded that I not say what he had taken. But, isn't obvious?

I am angry and scared and I can't even say why? This is my computer and I can write whatever I want but... his rules. He was so bizarrely specific. He spelled everything out and the threat... so I am gonna write as if my life depended on it—even though I could care less about my own life right now. But, I'm going to write until I figure out what the hell else I'm supposed to do.

So, what the hell am I supposed to write about? I have no choice at this point, so I will. But it's taking every effort for me not to just throw the computer to the floor. Words, especially in large collections and huge numbers of paragraphs are so stupid and useless these days because no one reads them. These feel like the most useless words I've ever written because I don't even want anyone to see them. Everyone scans the words these days. They look for the bullet points that they've seen in so many uninformative business and academic presentations. Or they read lists on the interwhatever. 5 Ways to Keep You Marriage Alive. 7 Foods You Should Never Eat. 12 Bullshit Conspiracy Theories. Whatever. 

I love books. I have loved books for as long as I can remember. I love diving into a story and slowly absorbing details until you're just there in the story, invisibly standing beside (or inside of) a character and looking around and imagining what they're seeing, feeling what they're feeling. I just never thought I would write one. I certainly never thought I would be forced to write one under these circumstances.

I'm sitting at my desk; it's dark out now. It's been three or four hours since I read through the ransom "package." I don't know. My desk is a drafting desk. I'm not sure why I prefer a drafting desk to a regular desk—I guess it's because it needs to kept feee of clutter so that you can raise it if you want. I like my desks to be absolutely free of clutter; no jars of pens or stacks of papers. I can normally think clearly. Right now, the clutter is in my head. My chair, who cares. I don't need to write about the furniture in the room or the decorations.

Maybe I can just get back to the idea of writing, what I'm doing right now—or at least what I do when I write papers. Right now, I'm just letting my head dump onto the page. I'm normally much more conservative about that. Come to think of it, besides the occasional journal entry I never even write in first person. Writing a literary paper just isn't remotely the same as writing fiction. For one, you're operating in someone else's domain, not really your own. It's like walking through a playroom and trying to figure out who the child is by looking at the toys that are on the floor as opposed to the ones still on the shelves. Is this author a messy child? Is the author a tidy child? (Is there such a thing?) Is there some one toy that stands out as the one the author loves the most?

Writing fiction, that's different. I've attempted it—in short bursts. I used to write fantasy stories. But I came to appreciate the language used in books. It's not true of all fantasy works, but most of them operate at an eighth grade reading level. I started to really enjoy plumbing the depths of authors who never steered clear of complicated ideas or words. I'm trying to think of the first book that opened my eyes to that possibility. There's something to be gained in long, elaborate sentences that explain that the preciousness of the present moment is what matters and yet, the irony is, no one (but me and some other nerds) even have the time for them. There's no preciousness in scanning a grocery list. I don't know, some batshit-insane buddhist or new wave crazy whatever might say different, but I... I need a good sentence.

The cascading water of the falls in the instant she grew the willpower to change, looked shockingly like a face.

That's a sentence. Descriptions like that are lost on people who just want to "like" a picture of waterfall—even though its every moment of froth is distinct and lost in an instant. Beauty constantly disappears, and yet the "like" reigns supreme these days.

Of course, long wordy sentences are what's keeping my... are what's keeping Rausch's threat at bay. According to the rules, I'm not allowed to say what he has planned. Frankly, if I wrote it down it would become all too real anyway. It's impossible to think about. It's impossible not to think about.

I suppose I could just sit here and write unrelated sentences in a row. That could get me to the first 5000 words, at which point I am supposed to put this on a USB key and leave it in a place that Rausch's going text me. I guess that will be Monday. That is an eternity right now. What the hell am I supposed to do without, I mean, without. What is the point of this? Who is this maniac? What does he want? I would write "What's his game?" but that sounds like a mystery novel cliche. This is too God damned serious for cliches. Although, this whole thing does feel like some sort of game. What a twisted psychopath.

I should call the police. This is insane. What Rausch has taken from me; it's absolutely totally precious to me, and I should call Rausch's bluff and get the cops. (While we're on it, what the hell kind of name is Rausch!?) I have to figure he's tapped my lines or he wouldn't bother to make the rules what they are. He seems to have some elaborate plan—carrying out a ransom for a month? I don't have enough good synonyms for insane. I mean you can say crazy or mad or... I really *don't* have that many synonyms—but my point is that insane is technical—like he needs to be committed to an institution, an insane asylum as they say. Mentally ill or disturbed is another way to put it I guess.

And what's the point of this Nanowrimo thing? I'd never even heard of it until today. It sounds stupid. I find the whole methodology of writing a novel in thirty-one days to be antithetical to the art; a history or an epic turned on its head! Why would a word count, by itself, create anything at all?  I could just type and type and type and type and type and type and type and type and type and type and type and type and type and type and type and type and type and type and type and type and type and type and type and type and type and type and type and type and type and type (note: even easier with cut and paste on  a computer!) and that would get me there, but just that there are words in place doesn't accomplish anything. It certainly doesn't make for any kind of cultivated reflection. Anyway, Rausch didn't tell me I couldn't do it. I suspect, when I turn this in on Monday—his first specified date—he might... critique it? Could he call the whole thing off if it doesn't meet his approval? Good God this is crazy. Why does he want to see it every three days? What does that mean? I really have to call the police. This is madness. He wants a novel and he wants 5000 words every three days; how does he expect to get anything but this?

Anyway, where was I? Some of the best stories I've ever read have been 6 words long. Look at what Hemingway did with 6 words: "For sale: baby shoes, never used." What is 50,000 words if the point—and the only point—is to simply get them out on the page? To type them, to sit down to the computer (let's face it, no one is doing this Nanowrimo thing by hand, ever) to just type and type to make some goal; what is the point?

I apologize. Maybe there is some point to doing it. It may matter to you—if anyone is going to read this ever. You're trying something unorthodox in your life and how can I not cheer you in such an endeavor? But me... I am in a peculiar position and a little agitated about it. Maybe it is some sort of game. Maybe you just need to start the habit of writing every day, and I think there is nothing more admirable. Please do it. There's definitely merit in writing every day. I do that myself, although it's for my papers. Weird, but I suddenly do feel like I'm talking to you—whoever you are. I haven't felt that way about my writing in years. I write critiques and analyses of dusty book that no one reads; why would I expect anyone to read my work? I'm Allen by the way.

Look, I will write this. I will. I will write not just for *my* life. Until I have the means to find Rausch, I will do this Sisyphean task for whatever mad and insane reasons he has. I capitulate. I beg. Stop this, Rausch. I know you are going to read these words. Stop this. Please.

Or, at least, I will do it until Monday comes. Surely, Monday will present an opportunity to do something about this situation. If I can stop it I will. I won't see this whole project through. I just won't.