---
title: The Whale and the Wave
---

My best friend, Jared and I, from when we were about seven to when we were eleven, used to walk together to our bus stop to go to school in the morning. We were, of course, in elementary school. But the junior high and high school kids used to wait at the same spot for their bus. It was early morning, no adults around. Most days it was peaceful. Kids would line their bookbags up along the street to hold their place in line, and then go about playing tag or... I can't even remember what else we did to occupy our time.

It's a funny thing about good memories just melting together into lapsed time, while the truly frightening things stand out. I mean, it's not funny—it's certainly not humorous or odd. From the perspective of evolution it makes perfect sense. You're just supposed to breed, mix up the gene pool, and then die. Why would you need to adapt to remember good times? Life has no interest in you having those good times. Consider yourself lucky when your life is good. Evolution does have an interest in making sure you remember when you were terrified. Even being terrified is a chemical reaction in your body. They say that's why fear tastes like aluminum. I can't second that. I've been afraid but never experienced the of aluminum. Maybe I should chew on some and see if I recognize it?

That's all obviously a preface to get to the point, I don't know when, that three of the older boys from the neighborhood decided to turn on me and Jared. I don't know why it happened. I don't know that Jared and I didn't do something to egg them on. The memory just begins with two of the boys holding poor Jerod's arms and the third boy just punching him in the stomach as hard as he could. Jared went down.

Then they came for me. Already panicked, arms already held back by two of them, I watched as the third, his name was Will, came at me to do the same as he'd done to Jared. Using the two boys as leverage, like parallel bars, I lifted myself up off the ground and proceeded to kick Will in the groin. In a panic, I bet I kicked him pretty damn hard. The two boys who had me in their grip let go, either in shock, or because I was in a frenzy. I've no idea why they let go, but I have the distinct memory of turning at one of them and him covering his crotch with both hands.

Jared and I grabbed our backpacks and ran. I don't think they chased after us. I'm pretty sure at the point the unkicked bullies were two busy turning on Will, pointing and laughing. Okay, I may have made that last part up, but it just wouldn't surprise me.

Now that I think about, there were a lot of other kids that would go to that bus stop. I wonder if that's what usually held the balance?—why it didn't break down into chaos more often like that? I know that it didn't, because I remember, distinctly, the times that it didn't. The whole thing is a micorcosm for the world. And I know that someone already wrote "Lord of the Flies" and that it is a better more well told story than mine, but the point still stands.

Ah! There's your context, Rausch. Now a story from Reza Bahadir:

There has always been a rogue wave in the deep ocean named Rahgnorak.[^25] This giant wave used to love to devastate continents and cities. The wave would roam around the five oceans and seek out all things constructed so that he could destroy them. The wave Rahgnorak loved nothing more than to tear down that which had purpose and meaning. The Rogue Wave wasn't evil, but rather was the tempestuous and jealous child of the one God that had looked upon it, and seen a reflection. The Rogue Wave was mad with contempt for the land and all it's life and variation. And in the wake of the Rogue Wave Rahgnarok, any civilization would have all of its pieces shredded and torn apart and shuffled. All of the pieces of any architecture made no sense anymore in the wake of the Great Wave. The wave Rahgnorak didn't just destroy what it took into the ocean, it obliterated all evidence of that thing's existence.[^26]

There has also always existed a great whale; known by the name of Fafnir.[^27] He has always been the greatest whale of all of the whales in the ocean. He was not just the largest. He was the kindest and most gentle. It was said that Fafnir's whale calls can be heard (by whales) throughout all of the five oceans. Whales love his calls (apparently). And Fafnir was so kind that he allowed representatives of all the crustaceans of the five oceans to come and live on his back where they built a capital for the crustacean kingdom, known as Argoehr. As Fafnir swam through the five oceans, he helped the crustacean kingdom to deliver all of its messages to all the corral reefs anywhere throughout the world.

At one point, Rahgnorak submerged an entire island and the crustacean kingdom called out to Fafnir and asked if something could be done about the Rogue Wave. Fafnir, kind soul, only replied that he would never fight the Great Wave. But, he would play with the Rogue Wave and keep it busy. He would play with the Rogue Wave forever if he could, because he loved nothing more than the joy of crashing through the waves. Fafnir knew that The Rogue Wave would prove to be his ultimate and unbeatable challenge.

The crustacean kingdom told Fafnir that whatever he could do to occupy Rahgnorak and keep the Rogue Wave from destroying anymore of the world, they would be content with that. So, Fafnir went in search of the Rogue Wave, not with the intent to break him, but with the intent to play with him.

To this day, deep in the ocean, you will find Rahgnorak and Fafnir battling one another. And Fafnir will bash himself, carrying the great crustacean city on his back, straight into Rahgnorak, just to keep him busy. Fafnir is always smiling. Rahgnorak is always angry. Neither of them ever wins.

* * *

So to summarize, writing about impotence is bullshit. I know the good guy doesn't always win. But in fables and stories, the good guys can win because there *are* good guys. Those bullies picking on me and my friend Jared? No doubt, bullies. But bad? Evil? Most of the time they were nice to us. I don't know what turned or changed on that day, but I know Jared and I went back to that bus stop and they didn't do it again. They aren't the bad guys and I'm not the good guy. They were *boys*. Am I really innocent for kicking some kid in the nuts? I could have taken a punch. Jared did? What is he in this story?

Writing about life is ridiculous to me sometimes, but ask yourself this, if Rahgnorak does what he does because some cruel god decided to stare into his once calm waters and stir him up, is that his fault? Is Rahgnorak evil or does he just serve some purpose. Is Fafnir good? He seems kind of dimwitted to me. Innocent certainly, but he would rather play than prevent future calamities from occurring. Is that good?

Ask youself this, Rausch: who is the whale and who is the wave. Let's drop the naive  monikers of good and evil. You're batshit insane, but are you evil? Are you, like Rahgnorak, willing to do anything—*anything at all*—to serve your purpose. Or are you jut playing at a game? I know which one I am. <- And that my friend, was word number 5,096 for the third drop off. Let's play.

[^25]: I've never understood where Reza got this name Ragnorok. It is terribly similar to an element of Norse Mythos called [Ragnarök](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ragnarök). It's totally reasonable in 1920s Iran for Reza to have been completely aware of Norse mythology, but it strikes me as odd because so many things that Reza has to say or write seemed very original in their conception. Then again, it could entirely be a coincidence of the order of letters. If you name your god Quixilar, how many centuries have to pass before someone else does the same? But the similarity goes beyond that. Ragnarök, according to the Norse mythos is the Apocalypse and is when everything doesn't just go to hell, it goes crazy.

When Ragnarök comes, rocks and steel turn soft, trees come alive, the ground quakes and comes apart. Ragnarök is a time when all the laws and order of the world just comes apart.

Reza's Ragnarok, to my mind, is a very similar phenomena. When a rogue wave (also known as a freak wave, a monster wave, a killer wave, etc.) occurs in the deep ocean it is a wave so large, so tall that even massive cruise liners can get swamped. I don't know that rogue waves ever hit shore, but if one did, it would be devastating for the society that received the blow. Not unlike Ragnarök, ground would turn soft, trees would become deadly, the ground would come apart... you see the similarities.

[^26]: For those who are curious, I believe that Rahgnorak is really just a metaphor for entropy. Everything dies; everything is re-shuffled into something else. The Norse myth; I don't know when in my youth I read it, but as I said before, it isn't the apocalypse we modern westerners think of. Everything in Ragnarök becomes something else. In fact, everything Rahgnorak also becomes something else. The Universe, as we mere mortals know it, turns inside out.

    Frankly, Ragnarök is not unlike where I am right now.

    Really, if I had my way, Ragnarök is, by far, a more interesting apocalypse than zombies or viruses or nuclear winters. The Norse had stunning imaginations. I mean they fought and slaughtered people while high on shrooms—that's gotta count for something.

[^27]: Again, I think Reza borrows another name from Norse mythos maybe. Fafnir (spelled identically) was a son of a dwarf king who, due to a curse, was turned into a dragon. Dragon? Whale? Maybe Reza was just trying to adapt the Norse tale to his homeland. I know that twice in his life he lived in a small town near the Gulf of Oman. He would have been familiar with the ocean and sailing.