### Canto 14

#### In which Able explains to Cal the kinds of things that mistakes are made with.

"It's a dustfish," says Cal as he and Able stand on other side of the helmeted fish swimming in lazy circles through the arid desert air.

"A dustfish?"

"Yep. They live in the ground, mostly, down toward the water--where there is any. Can be good eatin'."

Able makes a disapproving face.

"Well, I wouldn't eat this one, on account of what you've done to it."

"I didn't know there was water underground."

"Didn't your paw have a well?"

Able thinks, "Yes."

"Well--heh heh--that's why. The pump pulls the water up from the ground. What did you think it did?"

"I thought it made the water. Like I do—like my mistakes do sometimes."

Cal is taken aback. "Say that again; you can make water?"

"Well, I made a mistake once when I was thirsty and at first it's didn't do anything at all but get bigger after a few days, and then one day I was sitting with it and it floated over my head and dropped water all over me." Able pauses. "I didn't think it was very funny."

"Funny? No, I wouldn't call that funny. I would call that damned amazing. Do you think you could make another one?"

"Well, I need more parts."

"What parts?"

Able scrunches up his face. "It's hard to say. There are certain rocks that... I don't know. It's hard to explain."

"Maybe you could train your dustfish here to find 'em."

"Maybe. But I couldn't definitely teach the rolly how to do it. It knew where East was when I asked it."

"The what?"

Able leans down and picks up the roll from where it is sitting near him on the ground. "This guy." Like before, when thinking of the sun and the color of yellow from his memories, he peels open the rolly like an orange, into slices, all the while thinking of the color of mistakes--not any one color, but all of them, swirling. The rolly dutifully flattens and reveals an orb of light in its center that slowly forms into a pulsing arrow swirling around until it begins pointing in one direction.

Cal steps to Able and bends down, pushing his hat to the back of his head, and looking closely at the new multi-colored compass. "Able, I sure would like to know how you do that."

Able shrugs. "I don't really know. There are just parts of some things that *want* to be other things."

"You ever, uh, sensed that in a living thing?"

"Sort of. I mean, living things want stuff. But this is more like stuff that doesn't know what it wants. It just wants *something*."

"Stuff that wants purpose."

"Yes."

Cal scratches his head and stands up again. "We definitely better find Gef."

"Oh?"

"Yeah. Used to think he was crazy, but I think he may have some ideas about what your'e doin'."

"Really?"

"Maybe."

He and Cal gather up the mistakes and the flying dustfish and make their way back to the pede. Cal had managed to find some food for it while Able was at the creek bed and the creature seems ready to move. While they pack up Cal instructs Able to keep the mistake compass out so they can stop while they ride if they come across any ore of the right kind. As they ride on through the scrub forest, Cal seems to Able to be obsessed with things to create. He asks about making another viewer but Able says he would need another drawing of some kind. And Cal asks about compasses for other things, like could he make one to find food. Able thinks so. Cal asks about the rainmaker and in particular how big can Able make his mistakes.

"I've never really tried to make them very big. I suppose I could if what I wanted from them was big enough."

"Well, we'll just have to see if we can come up with something big enough for you to want then."