{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1187\cocoasubrtf390
\cocoascreenfonts1{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 LucidaGrande;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\fi1089\sl312\slmult1\pardirnatural\qj

\f0\fs26 \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
### Canto 21\
\
#### In which Able narrowly escapes the Howlings.\
\
As the horrifying calls come rolling over the dunes towards him, Able notices that the light from his drawing in the air has reached out and is tracing over one of the monuments nearest him, tracing out new runes on its surface and making them glow a yellow-orange color. The buzzing has come to him, aflame with red, spinning around him, warning him of danger, but despite the warning, Able, hypnotized, approaches the giant stone monolith and puts his hands to the surface to trace the runes. In the distance he hears a howling, which is now joined by another, somewhat farther away. He looks to the buzzing, which is in a panic now, and then back to the stone, at the meaningless, bright runes. When he traces one with a finger, the rune brightens in intensity, and then, after tracing a circle shape, the stone seems to give way and fold into itself, scraping loudly, and a small entrance appears in the midst of what once seemed completely solid.\
\
"Quickly," Able says to his little companions. "We can hid in here." He runs back to where he was sitting and folds up his writing disc mistakes, throwing them into his rucksack. Strangely, the small holographic block that he had created remains floating in the air. He tries to grab it as well, but his hand passes through it. Without another thought, he leaves it behind and heads back to the new entrance in the block in the sand, the Dustfish and the Buzzing following close behind. He ushers them in to the block and then stands and peers out across the dunes, looking for the source of the howling.\
\
Over the rise appears something black and crawling, jagged like a bundle of sticks, but moving like an insect. The thing, whatever it is, seems to sniff the air and then lets out another howl, only this time the sound is not dampened by the sand and the call takes on a quality of metallic scratching. No sooner has Able spotted the creature than it turns its jagged head\'97its "nose" a giant obsidian horn\'97in his direction and then begins running. Able cannot help but look at the black beast bounds at him for he's never seen anything like it. It moves like an animal but is covered in a kind of armor of shell and its insides seem to leak behind it as it runs, colors making shapes and then fading away into nothing. The beast is fast, and as it disappears behind the closer dune hill, Able takes one last glance at his little holographic block and then ducks inside the stone monument with the buzzing and the Dustfish.\
\
The space inside the stone block is cramped and Able struggles to position himself facing the door and then begins to rifle through his rucksack looking for the Flamehat. Upon finding it, he quickly rearranges it and lights it and looks around the inside of the door for runes, hoping to find one that will close the entrance behind him, but there do not appear to be any. He runs his hands along the stone's interior hoping even to just feel a rune, but nothing. Only ten feet away, he can still see his orange holographic block floating in the air, just a foot above the sand. Without warning, the beast comes crashing down near the block. From where he is sitting, he can only see a portion of the beast, it's so large. Now that it's close he can hear all manner of sounds coming from the beast itself, from inside it; whirring and clicking, Able realizes, that sound like one of his rollys. The beast approaches the orange block and sniffs it, hot steam floating up from its nostrils. And then, in one giant tooth-filled bite, the beast eats the block!\
\
Able keeps running his hands along the interior of the stone, looking for a lever or latch or anything, but a feeling comes over him, a feeling like when the moon was barreling down on he and Cal, a feeling of freezing. As the beast sits quietly ticking where it consumed his letter, Able begins to shake and can't catch his breath, except that he doesn't want to breathe at all. Slowly, quietly, he pushes himself back further into the recess of the monument, the Flamehat's light revealing the cramped tunnel as scoots himself. Suddenly the beast sniffs the air again and brings its head around toward the entrance to the tunnel. Able scoots himself backwards more quickly, now five feet or so from the entrance as the beast shifts and slides its bulk over to the little portal of daylight. The beast can fit only its nose and mouth in the portal, and this time when it sniffs, it sucks the air around Able out of the tunnel and even the little Flamehat shudders and almost goes out. Then the beast roars, the sound a deafening and terrifying mix of animal and machine, screaming like a lion while clacking like chains. Able, holding the Flamehat tight, scoots back some more and then falls into the dark.}