### Canto 1

Color does not exist. Color is something that you come to know or see.  Color is something you get used to.  Able had never known Color. Nothing in the stacks of tablets in his Father's fields could explain it; that vast expanse of written nothings As far as he couold look out to the mesas he thought there might be something there. There was nothing. There were stacks and stacks of tablets--which he could not read. Beyond his Father's shack were piled stacks of stone, chiseled with laws, rules, philosophies; the stone thinking was stacked up almost as high as the surrounding mesas, if you stood in the right part of the field. Able could see that you could stretch or maybe climb and see past the works of dead men. But time and time again his father would arrive and shout at Able to stop looking to the horizon. Able's Father said, "These words, these languages; they are not for us. They are dead. They are used no more. You embarrass yourself when you look on works like these.They are sacred. You should not attempt to read them. Ever."
She, though, the brightness of Able's life, she knew Color. His Father said there was no such thing, but the way she smiled made Able know that, yes, there must be, somewhere, Color. It was some experience to be had. Perhaps it could only ever be imagined. But still, Able's mother would look at him and her approval of him was yellow. He knew it. Able had no idea what yellow was. He knew the Life of the Desert, and that it was gray... or black or white. Her smile'97his Mother's smile'97was something different. Her smile was a thing that begged for... Color. Able knew that Color was needed in the world. His father spoke different and did not care for  his fantasies.

When he was a teen, Able's mother was laid buried amongst mistakes he had been forced to build. He did not believe in the mistakes he was forced to manufacture by his Father. All the mistakes were misguided and wrong. There was nothing in the materials that wanted to serve the purpose they were forced to served'97much like Able. The mistakes were objects and they surrounded his only source of daylight. His Father demanded that they be built, to breathe and churn and pump. Standing before her bedroom\'97more mausoleum now\'97Able's mother lay somewhere in a valley of pipes and hoses, housings and noise, where Able can no longer see her amongst the detritus. The accordion towers surround her and suck air asynchronously; up and down they go with their whispy huffs and sucking sounds. And Able, watching, knows that neither She nor the Mistakes wishes to continue on in such a fashion. The minarets of Able's design keep her alive. But it is his Father's desire that keeps all of the System functioning. No member of the System wants; together they must subsist. For now, Able's only power is to make mistakes that have their will ignored, and to drag on souls that have no will as well.\
\
The room is shadowed and, as always, gray. Only a single window, high up on a rickety wall, allows any light. That light is a breakfast-tea-colored dimness pushing through twin filters of dirt and fingerprints on the inside and the gray, restless desert of dust outside.\
\
Able shifts his weight to his good leg, to rest his hand on the doorway, and then hears the tired floorboards beneath him creak, their mourning louder than his own. In their sound he is lost. He is lost between his Father's command and his Mother's desire. He feels for Life\'97his Mother\'97that begins and does not repeat. He feels for mistakes and engineering that does not want to complete its task. His hands rest uselessly at his side. Then, they are clasped behind his back. Then, they are at his side\'97watching as the vacuum tubes rise and fall. The mistakes do their jobs. His eyes move from cylinder to cylinder as each machine reaches its peak, seems to hold its breath, then puffs and slides down. Falling with a staccato shuddering, the paper lungs huff dust off into the air in snowy spirals where the tired light captures and frames each dust particle's Brownian dance, and the bludgeoning of a thousand tiny, invisible fists makes them shift in fits.\
\
Able feels each molecule of pollutant travel up his nose and down his dry throat into his crusty lungs; every poison in the Shattered Land ccomes into him. He ignores it, breathes deep in defiance.  He closes his eyes, to ignore the misery of the place, and takes a moment to miss Her, the Her he knew prior to the mistakes he built. He lets himself meditate backwards in time. Lost in memories behind closed eyes now, *he looks up from the floor, playing with bits of rock, to see Her looking at him with that always familiar and perplexed look on Her face, wondering at the measure of her own oddity in him.*\
\
But then, as always, She smiles and reaches to pat him on the head, the sun behind the silhouette of Her head back then *yellow*, with beams streaming.* Able opens his eyes to the room, filled only with "colors" like rot, and he is not sure why he remembers Her Sunlight is ever Yellow. What is yellow!? He is not confident that he knows what yellow is. The world is gray.\
\
Outside the family shack, dust devils come to rattle the window and pay their respects with obsidian-eyed sorrow and rattling. The land is gray and covered with discarded speeches and arguments, stone artifacts chiseled with letters, the broken tablets of theorems and laws and philosophies, as far as the eye can see. And the sea of all this writing, messy and ruined on stone, is all overshadowed by a mesa. At the base of the mesa sits Able's father's disheveled shack. A few hundred yards away from their poor hovel is a shallow grave that Able's brother has dug. There, by the grave, two rotted pieces of lumber, tied together with twine, lean miserable wood planks, amongst the long-forgotten ideas.\
\
When Able has spoken to his Father of the machines and the things he has made, his Father's answer is always the same: "This is a valley of Men and Women who have spoken, who have thought their words History! They have all been Wrong! They have come to Rest here. They are Dead and Wrong. And there is no idea that has been thought that does not rest here; in these fields."\
\
The mesa behind his Father's house is singular. It dominates the landscape like a God; except that this is the Shattered Land and it is known that int he Shattered Land all Gods have died. None, forever. This is the Desert of Dead Ideas.}